Thailand announces market steps to ease coronavirus impact
   
The Bank of Thailand will continue to provide liquidity to the government bond market through bond buying. PHOTO: AFP 
Published
Mar 22, 2020, 11:09 pm SGT
More
Linkedin  FB Messenger  Telegram  Reddit  WeChat  Pinterest  Print  Purchase Article 
Permalink:
 
BANGKOK (REUTERS) - Thailand introduced measures on Sunday (March 22) to ensure sufficient liquidity in the bond market amid the spread of the coronavirus that has infected almost 600 in the country.

The Bank of Thailand (BOT) has set up a facility to provide liquidity for mutual funds through commercial banks, its governor Veerathai Santiprabhob told a joint news conference with the finance ministry and the Securities and Exchange Commission.

The facility will remain open until market conditions return to normal.

The BOT's preliminary estimate of eligible bond mutual funds is approximately 1 trillion baht (S$44.3 billion), he said.

A separate, corporate bond stabilisation fund worth 70 billion to 100 billion baht will be set up to invest in high quality, newly issued bonds by corporates that cannot fully roll over maturing corporate bonds, Mr Veerathai said.

The BOT will continue to provide liquidity to the government bond market through bond buying, he said.

"These measures are expected to provide liquidity and help the normal functioning of the financial market and help build investors' confidence", he said.

"Even though the Thai financial system remains strong, with commercial banks holding healthy levels of capital and liquidity reserves, the liquidity stress and the resulting irregularity in the global financial market have begun to affect the Thai financial market," he said.

The finance ministry will also propose measures to the cabinet on Tuesday to help people affected by the virus, a government official said.

Earlier, the country announced measures for the stock market , including setting up a support fund and revising rules to ease volatility.

JUMPING CASES OF INFECTIONS
Thailand on Sunday reported 188 new cases of infections, taking the total to 599. One person has died.



Thai Finance Ministry to adjust growth projection for 2020
Thailand  

A woman, wearing a facemask amid concerns over the spread of the Covid-19 (coronavirus) walking in a empty department store in Bangkok on Saturday (Feb 29). The Thai Ministry of Finance said on Saturday that it will readjust the country's economic growth projection for 2020 in April in the wake of severe drought, flagging economy and strong baht currency, as well as the recent Covid-19 outbreak.- AFP

BANGKOK: The Thai Ministry of Finance said on Saturday (Feb 29) that it will readjust the country's economic growth projection for 2020 in April in the wake of severe drought, flagging economy and strong baht currency, as well as the recent Covid-19 outbreak.

"It is highly possible that the forecast of 41.1 million tourist arrivals for this year will not be met although the full impacts from Covid-19 (coronavirus) outbreak cannot be accurately assessed for the time being," Wutthipong Chittangsakul, deputy director of the Ministry's Fiscal Policy Office, said.

Wutthipong said that it is too early to forecast whether the global outbreaks would ease off in the next three months as earlier anticipated, because it depends on the capabilities of each country to cope with the Covid-19 epidemic.

He noted, however, positive signs in the Thai export sector, which has increased by 3.4% in January, were in line with an increasing demand for Thai products, such as motorcycles and spare parts, furniture and sugar from its major trading partners, namely Singapore, the United States and China.

Other positive factors were the disbursement of 2020 budget and the weakening of the baht currency, which will help boost exports, said Wutthipong.

However, he pointed out that private investment in the industrial and agricultural sectors were showing signs of slowdown.- Xinhua/Asian News Network
Article type: free
User access status:
Tags / Keywords: Thailand , Economic Growth , Lower Projection



Building a nature-positive economy
Over half of global GDP is moderately or highly dependent on nature, says a World Economic Forum report

[Image: Men fish in Songkhla Lake at the break of dawn. (Photo by Karnjana Karnjanatawe)]   Men fish in Songkhla Lake at the break of dawn. (Photo by Karnjana Karnjanatawe)
Businesses are more dependent on nature and biodiversity than they may realise, according to The New Nature Economy Report produced by the World Economic Forum (WEF).

An analysis of 163 industry sectors and their supply chains found that more than half of the world's GDP is moderately or highly dependent on nature and its "services".

Pollination, water quality and disease control are just three examples of the services that an ecosystem can provide.

Economic value generation amounting to US$44 trillion -- over half the world's total GDP -- is moderately or highly dependent on nature and its services and, as a result, exposed to risks from nature loss.

Construction ($4 trillion), agriculture ($2.5 trillion) and food and beverages ($1.4 trillion) are the three largest industries that depend most on nature. Combined, their value is roughly twice the size of the German economy.

Such industries rely on either the direct extraction of resources from forests and oceans or the provision of ecosystem services such as healthy soils, clean water, pollination and a stable climate.

As nature loses its capacity to provide such services, these industries could be significantly disrupted. Industries highly dependent on nature generate 15% of global GDP ($13 trillion), while moderately dependent industries generate 37% ($31 trillion).

The WEF report, produced in collaboration with PwC UK, found that many industries have significant "hidden dependencies" on nature in their supply chain and may be more at risk of disruption than expected.

For instance, six industries have less than 15% of their direct gross value added (GVA) that is highly dependent on nature, yet over 50% of their supply chains' GVA is highly or moderately nature-dependent. The industries are chemicals and materials; aviation, travel and tourism; real estate; mining and metals; supply chain and transport; and retail, consumer goods and lifestyle.

In terms of global exposure, larger economies have the highest absolute amounts of GDP in nature-dependent sectors: $2.7 trillion in China, $2.4 trillion in the European Union and $2.1 trillion in the United States.

Consequently, even regions with a relatively lower share of their economy at high exposure to nature loss can hold a substantial share of the global exposure and, therefore, cannot be complacent.

"We need to reset the relationship between humans and nature," said Dominic Waughray, managing director of the WEF. "Damage to nature from economic activity can no longer be considered an 'externality'. This report shows how exposure to nature loss is both material to all business sectors and is an urgent and non-linear risk to our collective future economic security."

"Given the scale and severity of nature loss, business needs a wake-up call," said Celine Herweijer, partner and global innovation and sustainability leader with PwC UK. "The cascading physical, regulatory and legal, market and reputation risks we see mean nature risk now needs to be a mainstream issue for corporate enterprise risk management."

PATH FORWARD
Nature-related risks can be incorporated within existing ERM (enterprise risk management) and ESG (environmental, social and governance) processes, investment decision-making, and financial and non-financial reporting.

Many large businesses have already adopted the framework proposed by the Financial Stability Board's Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures (TCFD) for identifying, measuring and managing climate risks. This could be adapted for managing nature risks.

"It is important to note that there is a path forward," Mr Waughray said. "Businesses can formulate specific pathways to help 'bend the curve' of nature loss and damage within the decade by slowing down and halting biodiversity loss, then restoring nature and -- as a massive co-benefit -- contribute to achieving net-zero emissions by mid-century through smart nature-based solutions, all in the same package."

Costs are likely to rise for businesses that have not begun to include nature at the core of their enterprise operations, he said. Businesses that ignore this trend will be left behind, while those that have embraced the transformation will exploit new opportunities.

"Natural disasters have caused a significant impact to the business community, the wider economy and the general public, including people like us," said Sira Intarakumthornchai, CEO of PwC Thailand. "Needless to say, 2020 looks to be another difficult year after we saw record-high temperatures in Antarctica, the devastating bushfires in Australia and the dust pollution in and around Bangkok.

"The coronavirus, Covid-19, also presents challenges similar to those of a natural disaster. These examples underline the need for cooperation in using natural resources responsibly and promoting sustainability in various sectors."




Thai Stock Market May Head South Again On Monday  

(RTTNews) - The Thai stock market has moved higher in two of three trading days since the end of the two-day slide in which it had stumbled more than 90 points or 8.4 percent. The Stock Exchange of Thailand now rests just above the 1,125-point plateau although it figures to see renewed selling pressure again on Monday.

The global forecast for the Asian markets suggests continued consolidation as the coronavirus continues to hammer away at world economies. The European markets were up and the U.S. bourses were down and the Asian markets figure to follow the latter lead.

The SET finished sharply higher across the board as stocks rebounded from heavy selling last week - especially the financial shares and energy producers.

For the day, the index soared 83.05 points or 7.95 percent to finish at 1,127.24 after trading between 1,070.05 and 1,133.56. Volume was 12.293 billion shares worth 93.035 billion baht. There were 983 gainers and 413 decliners, with 269 stocks finishing unchanged.

Among the actives, Advanced Info added 3.95 percent, while Thailand Airport skyrocketed 14.36 percent, Asset World surged 13.46 percent, Banpu spiked 12.75 percent, Bangkok Bank climbed 9.55 percent, Bangkok Dusit Medical jumped 9.89 percent, Bangkok Expressway accelerated 13.43 percent, BTS Group gathered 7.39 percent, Charoen Pokphand Foods perked 6.39 percent, Kasikornbank collected 7.51 percent, Krung Thai Bank advanced 8.00 percent, PTT surged 14.56 percent, PTT Exploration and Production soared 15.00 percent, PTT Global Chemical accelerated 14.67 percent, Siam Commercial Bank rose 5.69 percent, Siam Concrete spiked 14.49 percent and TMB Bank was up 5.33 percent.

The lead from Wall Street is negative as stocks shook off a higher open on Friday and sank into the red as the day progressed, offsetting gains from the previous session.

The Dow shed 913.21 points or 4.55 percent to finish at 19,173.98, while the NASDAQ sank 271.06 points or 3.79 percent to 6,879.52 and the S&P 500 lost 104.47 points or 4.34 percent to end at 2,304.92.

The early strength on Wall Street came on optimism that the relief and support packages announced by global central banks and several governments will help limit the impact of the virus outbreak.

But stocks turned lower in afternoon trade as the virus numbers and economic backlash continued to be worrisome.

Crude oil prices tanked on Friday despite several countries and central banks announcing relief packages to help limit the economic impact of the coronavirus pandemic. West Texas Intermediate Crude oil futures for April ended down $2.69 or 11 percent at $22.53 a barrel on expiration day.




Meet the Govt: How Thailand plans to turn startups into 'economic warriors' through university, corporate collaboration

Incepted in 2009, The National Innovation Agency (NIA) has been playing a leading role in the development of Thailand’s innovation ecosystem by encouraging entrepreneurs to help solve grassroots economic problems through the use of technology –and to get more people in every region to launch their own startups.

e27 speaks to the leader of innovation management in Thailand, Dr. Pun-Arj Chairatana, the Executive Director of NIA, to get a deeper insight into the kingdom’s dynamic startup scene. We also seek to understand how it plans to compete with others in Southeast Asia.

A founder himself, Chairatana has been involved in several international and national research projects for both private and public sectors for a decade. These projects include “Trendnovation Southeast”– a project under the Searchlight Network of the Rockefeller Foundation; he was also involved in designing social innovation system and policy for the Thai social economy.

Chairatana is also the programme leader of Startup Thailand– a national startup promotion platform by the Ministry of Higher Education Science, Research and Innovation (MHESI) – that established a national-level policy to make Thailand an open area for startups. Not only in Asia, but also the world.

Spreading the startup word

The government of Thailand first set up a national startup committee in 2016. Since then, NIA played a crucial role as a leading agency to develop awareness and build an ecosystem for pioneers, startup investors, young entrepreneurs, corporates, and even capital markets and universities.

“Firstly, NIA strived to generate awareness among youngsters, big corporates and even governments on why startups are very important for the innovation ecosystem, and how they can act as a new economy warrior for Thailand,” says Chairatana.

While the startup scene in Thailand took off a bit late as compared to Malaysia, Singapore, Indonesia or Vietnam, there are quite a few startups that have already received big-ticket investments and they are starting to expand regionally and globally, says Chairatana. And at the same time, international investors are trying to learn and work with Thailand.

“We do not believe that startups by themselves will be able to manage Thailand’s economy. But they will create innovative jobs and their evolution will provide high potential sources of new income for SMEs. So startups will indirectly help us kickstart a key growth engine,” he clarifies.

Chairatana also adds that Thailand has a very active and strong large national corporates (LNCs) who back Corporate Venture Capitals (CVCs) with a majority stake in the startup investment scene in Thailand. This, he believes, is a “unique proposition” of the startup ecosystem in Thailand.

He lays down the key strategies and goals for NIA to shape the startup ecosystem of Thailand:

It will be more internationalised. There will be more and more new faces from around the world to work closely with the Thai ecosystem
The role of CVC will be more and more important for the startup ecosystem in Thailand. Next steps will be to brand CVCs, develop the capacity and capabilities of a fund manager, and work together with them to make key national strategies on investment for startups both in Thailand and abroad
There will be increasing concentration on deep technology and creative startups
Innovation districts in Bangkok and Chiang Mai are set up to attract international investment and stimulate the local startup scene
The government will play a very crucial role in accelerating growth and there will be greater collaboration between government and startups.
2020 ready

While the first phase was about generating awareness about startups and entrepreneurship, 2020 will mark the second phase of the startup ecosystem building in Thailand.

“We will shift from awareness and building infrastructures– both tangible and intangible to making the Thailand ecosystem more friendly for not only fresh faces from the university campuses, but also from all over the world,” says Chairatana.

To achieve this goal, Chairatana says, the NIA has three focus areas:

Catch ’em young
The first one is to bring in new firms, new startups. This is important since the existing startup numbers in Thailand is not very high as compared to others in SEA.

They have around 147 universities out of which 40 universities are already engaged with the Startup Thailand League. “This year we will extend support to them with the ‘You Startup Fund’ or YSF,” adds Chairatana.

The fund aims to support students from the day they decide to be an entrepreneur or startup founder. NIA will support them financially and technically on ideation and team building. It will also support them to accelerate growth with registered companies, using the university facilities.

Chairatana affirms that some public banks and other corporates have joined the bandwagon to support the youngsters.

“University startups in Thailand are capable of deep technology and creative innovation and hence this time we are choosing to focus on building and increasing the number of firms with a focus on deep technologies,” he says.

They will be emphasising on agritech and food tech, springing from the economic strength of the country in addition to health tech and medtech.

“Apart from that, we will focus on the application of IoT, 5G and also blockchain or even AI startups, which is a must,” he adds.

Bearing that creativity sells big in Thailand, they curated a new sector, called MARTech or music, arts, and recreation tech.

“We are talking about supply chains for startups working on MICE, art, design, e-sports or even sports tech. Thailand is internationally known for hospitality, tourism; hence there is an increasing number of startups in travel tech and media too,” says Chairatana.

“But our main focus will remain at universities and we expect to have an in-campus startup establishment of at least a 100 companies or more a year,” he continues.

From agrarian to industrial and now to digital

Thailand moved from being agriculture to nearly manufacturing-oriented OEM countries in the 1980s. The contributions of agriculture to the GDP is only around eight per cent while the service sector accounts for more than 50 per cent of its GDP.

“I don’t think we heavily depend on agriculture anymore. About 30 per cent of the population depends on agricultural income, more than half of the population lives in cities. So the agricultural supply chain has already shifted and changed into contract farming. The landowners don’t depend on agricultural income but instead on agricultural industries,” Chairatana elaborates.

Thailand does not have many agritech startups and their key challenge is to develop smart farming for those who need it, reducing the consumption of bio-pesticides and also chemicals in agriculture and water management.

Chairatana adds, “These kinds of challenges will be very good opportunities for startups working on agritech in the near future. That’s why we launched e-growth programs, which is an accelerator dedicated to agritech startups for not only Thailand, but also the rest of the world, so they can join hands and work together.”

Going beyond Bangkok

In SEA, only Thailand and Singapore have subscribed to the concept of an innovation district, he says. In Thailand, they do not just have an innovation district in Bangkok, but also in Chiang Mai, to attract more international faces to the arena.

Taking the pressure off Bangkok, Chiang Mai is further being designed to become the best landing pad or landing city for startups and investors in Thailand. They are already working with global startup hubs in Europe, Southeast Asia, East Asia, the US, and also Latin America.

Pandemic effect

The current economic slowdown owing to the COVID-19 pandemic has concerned all nations, Thailand included.  Logistics and the global supply chain have been affected by this economic downturn.

“It seems that an entrepreneur needs to be more cautious about the uncertainties in the world. And the uncertainties go beyond that of daily operations. Be it climate change, geopolitics or even the recent pandemic,” warns Chairatana.





Thai economic outlook among Asia’s weakest 

[Image: People wear facemasks amid concerns over the spread of the Covid-19 novel coronavirus at a shopping mall in Bangkok on March 10, 2020. (AFP photo)]   People wear facemasks amid concerns over the spread of the Covid-19 novel coronavirus at a shopping mall in Bangkok on March 10, 2020. (AFP photo)
Thailand is preparing to restrict some aspects of daily life after the country’s biggest spike in coronavirus cases, further damaging one of Asia’s weakest economic outlooks.

The steps to be considered Monday include placing more curbs on foreign arrivals, cancelling events with big crowds and closing entertainment venues deemed risky for spreading the virus. Confirmed cases jumped by 32 on Sunday to 114, sparking fears of a bigger outbreak and some panic buying of groceries.

The Thai economy was already reeling from a collapse in the critical tourism sector amid lock-downs worldwide to slow the transmission of the disease known as Covid-19. A drought and delayed public spending are additional blows, leaving Thailand with the highest odds of recession among Asian nations -- at 30% -- after Japan, according to data compiled by Bloomberg.

“We may need a sudden stop of economic activity, like China, as it proved effective in tackling the spread,” said Somprawin Manprasert, chief economist at Bank of Ayudhya Plc, a Thai unit of Mitsubishi UFJ Financial Group. “With such disruption, the economy will likely contract this year.”

Stock Slump
Investors have taken fright, making the benchmark SET equity index emerging Asia’s worst performer with a drop of about 29% so far in 2020. The baht has tumbled almost 6% against the dollar over the same period, the second-largest decline in an Asian basket tracked by Bloomberg.

Prime Minister Prayut Chan-o-cha’s ruling coalition last week rolled out stimulus steps designed to deliver a 400 billion baht economic boost, but their effectiveness is in doubt after previous packages fizzled.

The Bank of Thailand’s scope to follow in the footsteps of the US Federal Reserve by slashing borrowing costs to near zero, from the current 1%, may be limited by rules making 0.5% an effective lower bound.

Contingency Plan
Sunday’s abrupt jump in virus cases raised the specter of widespread community transmission of the kind that sickened thousands of people in nations such as China, South Korea, Iran and Italy.

Gen Prayut said Sunday that officials are mulling contingency options in case infections climb, such as setting up a hospital specifically for Covid-19 patients. Operators of riskier entertainment venues like pubs and sports stadiums could be ordered to close, he said.

“Today, health is the most important issue,” he told reporters in Bangkok.

Tourism accounts for about a fifth of the economy, but the government estimates arrivals may drop 24% from last year, to 30 million people.

Citigroup has chopped its Thai growth forecast to 0.2% for this year from 2.2%, while Bangkok-based brokerage Phatra Securities Plc predicts a 0.4% contraction.

“There’s going to be a big trade off,” Bank of Ayudhya’s Somprawin said. “Economic losses, for the control of the epidemic.”






Sluggish economy brings back poverty in Thailand

[Image: A man wearing a facemask walks with an umbrella amid concerns over the spread of the COVID-19 novel coronavirus walks along a road in Bangkok on March 6, 2020. (Photo by Jack Taylor / AFP)]

BANGKOK: The number of Thais living in poverty has fallen dramatically over the past 30 years but the downward trend is now reversing with the sluggish economy.

In 1988, the percentage of Thais living in poverty was over 65 per cent but it has progressively fallen to under 10 per cent in 2018.

However, according to a new World Bank report, that trend has reversed in recent years with stalled household incomes and consumption bringing a rise in poverty.

Between 2015 and 2018, the poverty rate in Thailand increased from 7.2 per cent to 9.8 per cent while the number of Thais living in poverty rose from 4.85 million to more than 6.7 million.

The rise in poverty in 2018 was widespread, occurring in every region and 61 out of the 77 provinces in Thailand.

The Central and Northeast regions saw the number of poor increase by over half a million over the same period.

The conflict-affected South recorded the country's highest poverty rate for the first time in 2017.

The Bangkok Post said that the report found the spike in poverty coincided with emerging and shifting economic and environmental challenges.

Over the past few years, Thailand's growth rate has dropped lower than other large developing Asia-Pacific economies. During the fourth quarter in 2019, Thailand had among the lowest GDP growth rates in the region, at 2.7 per cent.

The severe drought has also impacted the livelihoods of farmers, who are already among the country's poorest.

World Bank Thailand country manager Birgit Hansl said recent poverty trends show that despite Thailand's level of economic development, households were still vulnerable to shocks and weak economic conditions.

"To meet Thailand's aspiration of achieving high income status, Thai households will need better protection from income shocks such as ill health, job loss and natural disasters. It will be equally important to support the creation of more productive and higher paying jobs."

Since poverty data were first published in 1988, Thailand's poverty rate has increased five times, most recently in 2016 and 2018 and previously around the time of financial crises in 1998, 2000 and 2008. Thailand is the only Asean country to experience several increases in poverty since 2000.

While Thailand performs better than its Asean peers on many international indicators of well-being – such as primary school enrolment, access to water, sanitation, and electricity, and has a low international extreme poverty rate – inequality remains an issue.

The poorest 40 per cent of the country suffered falling income and consumption during 2015-2017.

The trend among this group is related to falling labour income, with wage growth stagnating and revenues from farming and business dropping.

World Bank economist and author of the report, Judy Yang said a more nuanced picture of inequity and a better understanding of vulnerability will be needed to guide Thailand's next steps towards building a more prosperous society for all.

"Eliminating persistent pockets of poverty will require growth strategies that take into account short term risk mitigation and long term investment needs."

The report also calls for intervention and investment to help transform Thailand. It said in the short term, the country will need to reinforce its safety nets.

Vulnerable populations need to be better identified and swift action taken to create better jobs in a changing economy.

In the long term, investing in the next generation is key as the next generation will shrink due to demographic changes.

Every child will need to be given a fair shot and provided the health and education opportunities to reach their potential. This will help households escape the poverty trap, support an ageing population, and boost Thailand's growth prospects.




Bank of Thailand: More than one solution
Central bank governor highlights importance of addressing possible adverse effects on employment from Covid-19 outbreak

[Image: Bank of Thailand governor Veerathai Santiprabhob. (Photo by Jetjaras Na Ranong)]   Bank of Thailand governor Veerathai Santiprabhob. (Photo by Jetjaras Na Ranong)
Concerns over the economy entering a technical recession have overshadowed the importance of addressing possible adverse effects on employment from the Covid-19 outbreak, says the Bank of Thailand.

"Sometimes we wear the hat of an analyst that concentrates so much on the technical aspects of our forecasts and calculations. If we realise it is a technical recession, it is only a technical calculation," central bank governor Veerathai Santiprabhob told the Bangkok Post  in an exclusive interview.

"We should emphasise more how best to help mitigate the impact of the outbreak on the Thai economy or Thai society."

A technical recession is defined as two straight periods of quarterly contraction.


The employment market is facing a host of risks this year, with widespread drought, poor exports, the previous delay of the 2020 fiscal budget and the coronavirus outbreak weighing on jobs, warned the National Economic and Social Development Council (NESDC).

The NESDC reported 37.5 million people were employed in the fourth quarter of 2019, down 1.1% year-on-year. This marks the third consecutive quarter of decreases.

"It is unavoidable that certain segments of society will be significantly hit by the outbreak, particularly those in the tourism sector or small and medium-sized enterprises that have been affected by not only the outbreak, but also a series of adverse incidents since last year: trade tensions, the drought and the [previous] delay of the [fiscal 2020] budget," said Mr Veerathai.

The tourism sector, which accounts for more than 10% of GDP and has been the growth engine in recent years, is bearing the brunt of the viral outbreak.

After a 2.5% rise in tourist arrivals in January, February's figures likely slumped 40%, and a deeper decline is expected in March and April, Tourism Authority of Thailand governor Yuthasak Supasorn told Reuters.

"To what extent we can mitigate the impact depends on the collaboration of various agencies. At this point, I think we all should realise that there is no one solution. It is a coordinated effort [and] an urgent effort from all parties to help those that have been impacted," said Mr Veerathai.

At its first meeting in February, the central bank's Monetary Policy Committee unanimously voted to lower the policy interest rate by 25 basis points to a historic low of 1%, seen as a preemptive move to shore up economic growth battered by the Covid-19 epidemic.

The Bank of Thailand has asked banks and non-bank financial institutions under its supervision to temporarily lower the minimum amount due on credit cards to below 10% of the outstanding balance and loosen the ceiling for personal loan credit lines in case of emergency for new coronavirus-hit debtors.

The Finance and the Tourism and Sports ministries were expected to unveil measures for cabinet approval today to stimulate tourism and aid those affected by Covid-19, but the announcement could be deferred to next week.





Banking Thai economy continued on a decelerating trend in January
In January 2020, the Thai economy continued to be on a decelerating trend According to a Press Release by the Bank of Thailand

According to the Press Release on the Economic and Monetary Conditions for January 2020 (Bank of Thailand), the Thai economy continued on a path of deceleration in January, contracting from the previous month in the value of merchandise exports excluding gold, manufacturing production, private investment indicators, and public spending.

 
Details of the economic conditions are as follows:

Exports declined 1.3% (excluding gold)
The value of merchandise exports expanded by 3.5 percent from the same period last year.

Excluding gold, exports value growth remained negative at 1.3 percent.

The continued contraction was due to exports of

1) Petroleum-related products such as chemical and petrochemical products, partly due to the slowdown in trading partners’ demand.

2) Agricultural products especially rice as a result of price competition from competing countries and supply affected by the drought.

3) Electronic products which turned into contraction from the high base effect last year. However, exports of electrical appliances and hard disk drive continued to expand thanks to the relocation of production base to Thailand in the previous periods. Also, exports of agro-manufacturing products continued to expand from sugar.

Tourist arrivals expanded 2.5%
The number of foreign tourist arrivals expanded a rate close to the previous month with 2.5 percent, mainly from the expansion in the number of Malaysian Russian and Hong Kong tourists as a result of Chinese lunar new year that came earlier than last year.

However, the number of Chinese tourists contracted due to the announcement of Chinese government to ban on outbound group tour since January 24, 2020 after the outbreak of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) in China.

Private investment indicators continued to deteriorate from the same period last year
The slowdown in domestic and external demand, the low capacity utilisation rate, and the fragile business sentiment led to the delay in business investment.

This was reflected by the continual contraction of investment in machinery and equipment from domestic machinery sales, and the number of newly registered motor vehicles, as well as import of capital goods which turned into contraction.

In addition, investment in construction contracted from both permitted construction area and construction material sales

Public spending, excluding transfers, continued to contract from both current and capital expenditures
Current expenditures contracted from purchases on goods and services and compensation of civil servants,partly due to the high base effect last year. Capital expenditures of central government continued to contract as a result of the delayed enactment of the FY2020 budget.

Meanwhile, state enterprise’s capital expenditures also contracted from disbursement of some energy-related and transportationagencies.

Private consumption indicators expanded at a slower pace from the same period last year, consistent with softening household income and consumer confidence, together with financial institutions’ tightening of credit standards after credit quality deteriorated.

Although farm income expanded well in this month, the outlook for this yearwas likely to besubdued because of the drought.

The deceleration in private consumption indicators was from spending on services although spending on non-durable goods slightly improved from sales of consumer goods after the decline in the previous periods.

Additionally, spending on durable goods less contracted from vehicle sales partly due to the benefit from the new car model launch. Consistently, manufacturing production contracted in line with softer domestic and external demand .




Stocks fell deeper at close of Monday trading
Stocks fell further on Wall Street Monday as investors waited for Democrats and the Republicans to pass a rescue package for the economy.

BANGKOK, Thailand — The stock market did not show signs of improving Monday as trading closed on Wall Street. 

30 industrials closed at 18576.04 and were down to 597.94 which came to -3.12 percent. The New York Stock Exchange closed at 8776.12, falling down to 357.04, and the Nasdaq composite fell to 6860.67, closing at 18.84. The Standard and Poors 500 closed at 2236.70, leaving it down to 68.22.

The Federal Reserve did what it could to help financial markets and the economy Monday. But investors are still waiting for Congress and the White House to do the same.

Stocks were down nearly 5% in a volatile day of trading on Wall Street as investors waited for the Dems and the GOP to settle their differences and pass a nearly $2 trillion rescue package for the economy. Earlier, U.S. stock futures and European stocks got a bump higher following the Fed's latest massive, surprise announcement of support, but the gains quickly vanished.

With Monday's losses, the stock market has lost more than a third of its value since its record last month, as more businesses shut down in hopes of slowing the spread of the coronavirus. Economists increasingly say a recession seems inevitable, and no one can say for sure how deep it will be or how long it will last.

Markets are likely to remain incredibly volatile as long as the number of new infections accelerates. Until then, investors are looking for both central banks and governments to do their parts to support the economy.

The Fed came through Monday, saying it would buy as many Treasurys and mortgage-backed securities as it takes to stabilize bond markets. It goes way beyond the $700 billion in purchases it announced last week, which economists called a “bazooka” of support. It also said it will buy corporate bonds and other investments to help improve trading in markets, which have been thrown into mayhem amid a rush for cash.

Investors are rushing to sell what they can to raise cash, which has caused prices for even high-quality bonds to fall and trading to get snarled. The Fed's efforts are aimed at helping those markets.

"This is excellent, comprehensive, covering many areas of the financial markets, their function, the flow of credit — this is exactly what was needed," said Donald Kohn, former Fed vice chair and now senior fellow at the Brookings Institution. “The Fed has hit it out of the park as far as I’m concerned."

“The key issue now is getting the fiscal response straight,’’ said Kohn, saying that Congress needs to finance a stabilization fund to back up the Fed’s efforts.

Congress debated through the weekend on a rescue plan for the economy that was nearing $2 trillion. But top White House officials and congressional leaders are struggling to finalize it.

“The Fed is only important to the extent that it keeps the markets running smoothly," said Chris Zaccarelli, chief investment officer for Independent Advisor Alliance. “It’s completely up to the federal government, and I mean Congress and the executive branch, at this point.”

Talks are set to resume after Democrats derailed the plan Sunday night. They argued it too heavily favored corporations and did too little for workers and health care providers. Still, optimism remains that they'll get to a compromise.

“If the alternative is crashing the plane, then you’ll do everything you can to not crash the plane,” said Thomas Martin, senior portfolio manager at Globalt. “Ultimately the government will get there."

The S&P 500 was down 4.9%, as of 11:45 a.m. Eastern time in another day of sudden swings. It had shaved its loss down to just 0.4% earlier in the morning.

The Dow Jones Industrial Average fell 946 points, or 4.9% to 18,227. The Nasdaq was down 3.5% after earlier being up 0.8%.

Lockdowns and closures intended to halt the spread of the new coronavirus expanded over the weekend to include many cities around the world and the number of people infected surged past 336,000. All the moves help slow the spread of the virus, but they also sap away more revenue from businesses big and small.

A sharp surge in cases and in deaths across the region, especially in Southeast Asia, have also raised the level of alarm.

Ultimately, investors say they need to see the number of new infections stop accelerating for the market to end its prolonged, bouncing tumble.

Investors have continued to seek safety in U.S. government bonds, driving their yields broadly lower. The 10-year Treasury yield, which influences interest rates on mortgages and other consumer loans, slid to 0.70% Monday from 0.94% late Friday.

Many investors are waiting for markets to fall further before plunging back in, said Naeem Aslam of Avatrade.

Should the market drop by another 10% to 20%, the overall decline from recent peaks would be over 50%, and “that would be a massive buy signal,” Aslam said.

More than 14,400 people have died of the coronavirus worldwide, while nearly 100,000 people have recovered.

For most people, the coronavirus causes only mild or moderate symptoms, such as fever and cough, and those with mild illness recover in about two weeks. Severe illness including pneumonia can occur, especially in the elderly and people with existing health problems, and recovery could take six weeks in such cases.

Trading on the New York Stock Exchange went all-electronic for the first time Monday after the exchange temporarily closed its trading floor as a precaution. The exchange announced the move last week after two employees tested positive for the virus. The number of floor traders had dwindled sharply in recent years as more trading become electronic.