Japan ready to top up government spending if coronavirus hits economy, says Abe
Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe explains the government's response to the coronavirus epidemic to opposition parties during a parliamentary budget committee in Tokyo, Japan, on March 2, 2020.]   Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe explains the government's response to the coronavirus epidemic to opposition parties during a parliamentary budget committee in
 
TOKYO (REUTERS) - Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe said on Tuesday (March 3) his government was ready to deploy further fiscal stimulus measures if needed to protect the country's already fragile economy from the negative effects of the coronavirus.

Abe, who has come under fire for his handling of the crisis, has pledged to focus over the next couple weeks on halting the spread of the virus in Japan, where the number of infections has almost reached 1,000. Twelve people have died.

The outbreak comes at a critical time for Japan, raising the spectre of a potential second quarter of negative economic growth just as the country prepares to host the summer Olympic Games in July and August.

"We've already compiled a spending package to forestall various risks" funded by a supplementary budget for the current fiscal year ending in March and next fiscal year's budget, Abe told parliament on Tuesday.

"We'll scrutinise the impact of the coronavirus on the global and Japanese economies. If further steps are deemed necessary, we will take action without hesitation," he added.

Abe's remarks came a day after Bank of Japan Governor Haruhiko Kuroda signalled the central bank's readiness to stabilise markets if necessary.

The government in December approved record budget spending for the coming fiscal year, part of which will be used to fund a US$122 billion fiscal package to boost growth hit by the US-China trade war and an Oct. 1 sales tax hike.

The budget needs parliament approval to take effect, and is still being deliberated in the upper house of the Diet.

Abe's administration has been reluctant to sign off on fresh spending before the budget formally passes parliament, for fear of drawing criticism that its existing spending plan was insufficient to prop up the economy.

So far, government steps to deal with the epidemic have all been funded by reserves it sets aside for emergency needs.

Japan's economy suffered a contraction in the December quarter and may shrink again in the current quarter due to the health crisis, which has disrupted supply chains and hit retailers reliant on inbound tourism, analysts say.

CRITICISMS

The bulk of Japan's confirmed coronavirus cases and half the recorded deaths were passengers who caught the pathogen on the Carnival Cruises Diamond Princess cruise ship that was quarantined off the coast near Tokyo for several days last month.

Abe's handling of that incident and subsequent attempts to halt the spread of the virus have been criticised both at home and abroad.

His decision to ask schools to shut down until spring break late in March to prevent the spread of the virus has angered parents scrambling to arrange childcare.

In response, Abe said the government would create a fund to subsidise workers who had to take time off work to care for their children.

Abe, who returned to office in 2012 and is now Japan's longest-serving premier, has made hosting the Tokyo Olympics a top priority of his tenure. Officials have repeatedly denied that they are considering postponing or canceling the Games.



Abe calls for major economic package against virus 
 
Prime Minister Shinzo Abe has stressed his intention to put together major economic measures to fight against the impact of the coronavirus pandemic.

Abe made the comment in a general meeting of ruling Liberal Democratic Party members of both houses in the Diet on Tuesday. The meeting was held after the party postponed its convention scheduled this month.

He said there are concerns that the pandemic would have a huge impact on the economy. He said that jobs must be protected and businesses must continue.

Abe said that economic and fiscal measures which are necessary and sufficient need to be implemented promptly according to changing situations.

He called on the party to put all its energy into protecting jobs, and creating a bold and strong stimulus package to achieve a V-shaped economic recovery.

Abe said the Tokyo Olympics and Paralympics should be held as proof that the international community worked together to overcome the coronavirus.



Japan posts record machinery orders growth in November in boost to economy
TOKYO (Reuters) - Japan’s core machinery orders posted record monthly growth in November, in a bright sign for business spending which has helped sustain a fragile recovery in the world’s third-largest economy.

FILE PHOTO: Heavy machinery is seen at a construction site in Tokyo, Japan June 8, 2016. REUTERS/Toru Hanai 
Cabinet Office data on Thursday showed that core orders, a highly volatile data series regarded as an indicator of capital spending in the coming six to nine months, rose 18.0% in November from the previous month.

That marked the biggest month-on-month gain since comparable data became available in 2005, and also was the first rise since June.

The jump in November orders was largely driven by big-ticket items, such as orders for railway cars, transport equipment and thermal hydraulic motors. It shattered a 3.2% gain forecast by economists in a Reuters poll and more than recouped an unexpected 6.0% drop in October.

“The surge in ‘core’ machinery orders in November was largely due to a spike in transport (and) postal activities and we still expect non-residential investment to fall this year,” said Tom Learmouth, Japan economist at Capital Economics.

“Given that capital goods shipments probably fell sharply in Q4, we are still forecasting a sizeable 2.3% q/q fall in non-residential investment last quarter,” he wrote in a note.

Capital expenditure has been a bright spot for the economy in the second and third quarter of last year as companies invested in equipment to prepare for a nationwide tax hike and overcome a tight labor market.

Japan’s economy grew at a faster pace than initially reported in July-September last year largely due to upgrades of business and consumer spending.

Many analysts expect the gross domestic product reading for the fourth quarter of 2019 due next month to show a contraction as a sales tax hike from October hit consumption, one of the economy’s main growth drivers.

Government data last week showed Japan’s inflation-adjusted real wages declined at their fastest pace in four months in November, further clouding the outlook.

OVERALL CAPEX SLUGGISH
Still, the Bank of Japan is likely to revise up slightly its economic forecast for the fiscal year beginning in April to reflect an expected boost from the government’s latest spending package, sources familiar with the central bank’s thinking said.

Any upward revision will allow the BOJ to justify keeping monetary policy steady at its two-day rate review that ends on Tuesday next week, analysts said.

By sector, manufacturers’ orders edged up 0.6%, boosted by steel and ceramics, while core orders from the service-sector surged 27.8%, led by a massive 146.4% month-on-month jump in the transport and postal business.

The data showed overall capital spending remains somewhat sluggish as that surge lifted the headline reading, said Takeshi Minami, chief economist at Norinchukin Research Institute.

However, the manufacturing sector may be close to bottoming out, said Minami.

“The global economy is showing signs that it has begun to bottom out, so I think machinery orders will start bottoming out as well.”

Compared with a year earlier, core orders, which exclude those of ships and electricity, climbed 5.3% in November, defying a 5.4% contraction seen by economists in a Reuters poll.



Bank of Japan sees deeper economic pain, even after emergency easing

TOKYO (Reuters) - The coronavirus pandemic could plunge Japan into deep economic stagnation, the country’s central bankers warned at last week’s emergency monetary policy meeting with one seeing room for more stimulus, a summary of their discussion showed on Wednesday.

FILE PHOTO: A Japanese flag flutters atop the Bank of Japan building under construction in Tokyo, Japan, September 21, 2017. REUTERS/Toru Hanai 
The Bank of Japan expanded monetary stimulus in an unscheduled policy meeting on March 16 to ease corporate funding strains and calm financial markets jolted by the health crisis.

A summary of opinions expressed at last week’s rate review showed the deep concern shared among the nine-member board over the huge blow the virus outbreak could inflict on an economy, already reeling from last year’s sales tax hike.

“Japan’s economy may continue to stagnate even after overseas economies recover, as the impact of the virus could be enormous,” one board member was quoted as saying.

“I’m doubtful of the view Japan’s economy will stage a strong rebound once the virus is contained,” another opinion in the summary showed.

One board member said the BOJ can continue to respond flexibly to risks, through measures such as another emergency policy meeting or ramping up government bond purchases, as recession fears heighten, the summary showed.

The summary, typically released about a week after the BOJ’s policy meeting, does not disclose the identity of the board member who made the comments.

The pandemic has become a global economic crisis with travel restrictions, event cancellations and supply chain disruptions raising the chance Japan will slip into recession, keeping policymakers under pressure to deploy huge fiscal and monetary stimulus.

Confirmed coronavirus cases around the world exceeded 377,000 across 194 countries and territories as of early Tuesday, according to a Reuters tally, more than 16,500 of them fatal.

With the March monetary easing intended as a stop-gap move to address immediate strains in markets, the BOJ will focus more on how to address the economic fallout from the virus when it next meets for a rate review on April 27-28.

A senior ruling party lawmaker on Wednesday called on the government to compile a record stimulus that would be bigger than the 57-trillion-yen ($514 billion) package deployed during the global financial crisis.

The BOJ also stands ready to expand stimulus again in April if the pandemic leads to cuts in jobs and capital expenditure big enough to derail prospects of an economic recovery, sources have told Reuters.




Tokyo 2020 Olympics  Olympics delay to cost Japan $6bn in economic losses 
Corporate sponsors and hotels to miss windfall, while rebooking venues is difficult 

RURIKA IMAHASHI and FRANCESCA REGALADO, Nikkei Staff writers   March 24, 2020 03:01 JST  
Japan -- and the corporate sponsors that have spent an estimated $3 billion -- are bracing for a postponement of the Tokyo Olympics.   © Getty Images  
TOKYO -- Japan is faced with the possibility of $6 billion in economic losses if the Tokyo Summer Games do not proceed as planned, now that Prime Minister Shinzo Abe and the International Olympic Committee acknowledged for the first time Monday that a postponement was on the table due to the coronavirus pandemic.

If the games are delayed, the overall domestic financial loss could reach 600 billion yen to 700 billion yen ($5.42 billion to $6.32 billion), private economists estimate. The impact would apply both to the nation -- which has invested heavily in making the Olympics a national showcase -- and to companies such as Bridgestone that have poured an estimated $3 billion into sponsorships.

Bridgestone told the Nikkei Asian Review on Monday that it was preparing for a potential postponement.

"We understand that some considerations should be made regarding the postponement of the games, as the health of athletes and people is important," said the tire company, which has a worldwide sponsorship contract with the IOC through 2024. "The situation is changing day by day, and we will look carefully at the situation and prepare for possible changes, as we think there will be various possibilities."

Market observers were counting on the 2020 Olympics and Paralympics to help Japan's economy rebound from a dip prompted by the consumption tax hike in October 2019. Economic benefits were expected to spread to a wide range of sectors, from construction to service.

Goldman Sachs estimated this month that Japan would lose 550 billion yen in inbound and domestic consumption in 2020 if the Olympics do not take place as planned.

Estimates of the economic boost for Japan have been based on growth enjoyed by previous host countries. Though most of the investment in infrastructure for the Summer Games has already been made, the vast amounts of consumer spending during the event remain at stake.

An audit at the end of last year found that the Japanese government has spent over 1 trillion yen on infrastructure projects related to the Olympics.

Many players in the tourism sector also have counted on the boost expected from the Tokyo Olympics, particularly as business so far this year has been hurt severely by the coronavirus pandemic.

Imperial Hotel last week lowered its net profit forecast for the fiscal year ending this month to 2.3 billion yen, down 37% from the previous year. The hotel operator, with locations in Tokyo and Osaka, is suffering from the sudden decline in foreign guests who normally account for half of bookings. The occupancy rate for March has been below 50%, compared with 80% in the same month last year.

The hotelier said Monday it had a "significant amount" of bookings from the Olympic organizing committee, and had yet to calculate the financial loss if the Summer Games were postponed. Hotel Okura, also in Tokyo, is fully booked by the IOC during the event.

A lengthy postponement also would affect the value of the Tokyo Games for the many blue-chip corporate names that were lined up as sponsors by Japan and the IOC. Japanese companies might seek revenue or reimbursement for their $3 billion investment in the Tokyo Olympic organizing committee.

Toyota Motor and Panasonic, like Bridgestone, are worldwide partners of the IOC. Canon, Asahi Breweries, Mizuho Financial Group and NEC are among the official partners, which have contracts with the Tokyo organizing committee.

Toyota, Panasonic, Asahi Group Holdings and Canon declined to comment.

One sponsor said the contributions made were significant and should not change regardless of a delay.

"We don't know whether the Olympics will be postponed, and if so, for how many months or how many years," the sponsor said. "We don't know what a delay would mean in terms of cost, but we are not thinking about increasing our contribution at this moment."

Another local sponsor declined to speculate about the fate of the 2020 Games.

"There's nothing we can do. We're just watching what is going to happen," the sponsor said. "The IOC never said there won't be a delay or cancellation. They keep all possibilities open."

At Airweave, which looks to supply 18,000 sets of bedding to athletes in the Olympic Village, President Motokuni Takaoka said he had not been informed by the organizing committee about how sponsorship fees or terms would be affected by a cancellation or postponement. The company is sticking to its original plan, he said.

But canceling the Olympics would cause financial damage for the company, Takaoka said. Airweave purchased advertising space for the summer, which would be wasted with a postponement.

Yet "the Olympics [contributed to the company] in developing new products as well as for marketing purposes," he said. Airweave this month announced a new custom mattress product originally developed for the Olympic athletes.

Beyond the economic impact, it is unclear whether the Olympic venues would be available in a year or two. The Tokyo Games are slated to stretch across 42 sites nationwide.

Makuhari Messe, where the wrestling, taekwondo and fencing events will be held, is one of Japan's busiest convention centers. It hosted 940 events in fiscal 2018 and is receiving inquiries for dates a year or more in the future.

Tokyo Big Sight, which is to serve as the main press center for Japanese and international media, is already taking reservations for July and August 2021.

"We are finalizing contracts for several events," a representative said.

Yoshiro Mori, president of the Tokyo organizing committee and a former Japanese prime minister, on Monday cited the need to move quickly in determining site availability.

"We need to find out whether every one of our venues would be free" for a future date, Mori said. "It would take a tremendous amount of time, and we need to hurry."

The Olympic Village will be converted into condominiums after the games. Mitsui Fudosan Residential and nine other developers have begun selling the 4,145 units, with a planned move-in date of March 2023.

"We are supposed to accept any delays to move in, and won't be receiving any compensation," one buyer said.

Security poses a challenge as well. About 14,000 private security guards will be needed across the various venues and their surroundings. A joint venture among several hundred security companies including Secom and Alsok is to provide the staff this summer, but a delay would mean trying to secure the same number of people again in a year or two.

Postponing the Olympics to summer 2021 could cause conflicts with other major sports events, like the swimming world championships in Fukuoka and the track and field world championships in the U.S. state of Oregon. The IOC likely will take the lead on negotiations with different sports federations.


Tokyo 2020 Olympics  Olympics delay to cost Japan $6bn in economic losses 
Corporate sponsors and hotels to miss windfall, while rebooking venues is difficult  
Japan -- and the corporate sponsors that have spent an estimated $3 billion -- are bracing for a postponement of the Tokyo Olympics.   © Getty Images  
TOKYO -- Japan is faced with the possibility of $6 billion in economic losses if the Tokyo Summer Games do not proceed as planned, now that Prime Minister Shinzo Abe and the International Olympic Committee acknowledged for the first time Monday that a postponement was on the table due to the coronavirus pandemic.

If the games are delayed, the overall domestic financial loss could reach 600 billion yen to 700 billion yen ($5.42 billion to $6.32 billion), private economists estimate. The impact would apply both to the nation -- which has invested heavily in making the Olympics a national showcase -- and to companies such as Bridgestone that have poured an estimated $3 billion into sponsorships.

Bridgestone told the Nikkei Asian Review on Monday that it was preparing for a potential postponement.

"We understand that some considerations should be made regarding the postponement of the games, as the health of athletes and people is important," said the tire company, which has a worldwide sponsorship contract with the IOC through 2024. "The situation is changing day by day, and we will look carefully at the situation and prepare for possible changes, as we think there will be various possibilities."

Market observers were counting on the 2020 Olympics and Paralympics to help Japan's economy rebound from a dip prompted by the consumption tax hike in October 2019. Economic benefits were expected to spread to a wide range of sectors, from construction to service.

Goldman Sachs estimated this month that Japan would lose 550 billion yen in inbound and domestic consumption in 2020 if the Olympics do not take place as planned.

Estimates of the economic boost for Japan have been based on growth enjoyed by previous host countries. Though most of the investment in infrastructure for the Summer Games has already been made, the vast amounts of consumer spending during the event remain at stake.

An audit at the end of last year found that the Japanese government has spent over 1 trillion yen on infrastructure projects related to the Olympics.

Many players in the tourism sector also have counted on the boost expected from the Tokyo Olympics, particularly as business so far this year has been hurt severely by the coronavirus pandemic.

Imperial Hotel last week lowered its net profit forecast for the fiscal year ending this month to 2.3 billion yen, down 37% from the previous year. The hotel operator, with locations in Tokyo and Osaka, is suffering from the sudden decline in foreign guests who normally account for half of bookings. The occupancy rate for March has been below 50%, compared with 80% in the same month last year.

The hotelier said Monday it had a "significant amount" of bookings from the Olympic organizing committee, and had yet to calculate the financial loss if the Summer Games were postponed. Hotel Okura, also in Tokyo, is fully booked by the IOC during the event.

A lengthy postponement also would affect the value of the Tokyo Games for the many blue-chip corporate names that were lined up as sponsors by Japan and the IOC. Japanese companies might seek revenue or reimbursement for their $3 billion investment in the Tokyo Olympic organizing committee.

Toyota Motor and Panasonic, like Bridgestone, are worldwide partners of the IOC. Canon, Asahi Breweries, Mizuho Financial Group and NEC are among the official partners, which have contracts with the Tokyo organizing committee.

Toyota, Panasonic, Asahi Group Holdings and Canon declined to comment.

One sponsor said the contributions made were significant and should not change regardless of a delay.

"We don't know whether the Olympics will be postponed, and if so, for how many months or how many years," the sponsor said. "We don't know what a delay would mean in terms of cost, but we are not thinking about increasing our contribution at this moment."

Another local sponsor declined to speculate about the fate of the 2020 Games.

"There's nothing we can do. We're just watching what is going to happen," the sponsor said. "The IOC never said there won't be a delay or cancellation. They keep all possibilities open."

At Airweave, which looks to supply 18,000 sets of bedding to athletes in the Olympic Village, President Motokuni Takaoka said he had not been informed by the organizing committee about how sponsorship fees or terms would be affected by a cancellation or postponement. The company is sticking to its original plan, he said.

But canceling the Olympics would cause financial damage for the company, Takaoka said. Airweave purchased advertising space for the summer, which would be wasted with a postponement.

Yet "the Olympics [contributed to the company] in developing new products as well as for marketing purposes," he said. Airweave this month announced a new custom mattress product originally developed for the Olympic athletes.

Beyond the economic impact, it is unclear whether the Olympic venues would be available in a year or two. The Tokyo Games are slated to stretch across 42 sites nationwide.

Makuhari Messe, where the wrestling, taekwondo and fencing events will be held, is one of Japan's busiest convention centers. It hosted 940 events in fiscal 2018 and is receiving inquiries for dates a year or more in the future.

Tokyo Big Sight, which is to serve as the main press center for Japanese and international media, is already taking reservations for July and August 2021.

"We are finalizing contracts for several events," a representative said.

Yoshiro Mori, president of the Tokyo organizing committee and a former Japanese prime minister, on Monday cited the need to move quickly in determining site availability.

"We need to find out whether every one of our venues would be free" for a future date, Mori said. "It would take a tremendous amount of time, and we need to hurry."

The Olympic Village will be converted into condominiums after the games. Mitsui Fudosan Residential and nine other developers have begun selling the 4,145 units, with a planned move-in date of March 2023.

"We are supposed to accept any delays to move in, and won't be receiving any compensation," one buyer said.

Security poses a challenge as well. About 14,000 private security guards will be needed across the various venues and their surroundings. A joint venture among several hundred security companies including Secom and Alsok is to provide the staff this summer, but a delay would mean trying to secure the same number of people again in a year or two.

Postponing the Olympics to summer 2021 could cause conflicts with other major sports events, like the swimming world championships in Fukuoka and the track and field world championships in the U.S. state of Oregon. The IOC likely will take the lead on negotiations with different sports federations.



TOKYO—The coronavirus outbreak could hardly have come at a worse time for Japan. The economy and Prime Minister Shinzo Abe’s reputation have both taken a hit. Even the much-vaunted Tokyo 2020 Olympic Games that kick off in late July may be at risk.

It was not supposed to be like this. Abe had just celebrated the feat of becoming the longest-serving prime minister in Japan’s history. Relations with China were improving with an upcoming state visit by Chinese President Xi Jinping, his first since coming to power. The Olympics were expected to show a new Japan, much in the way that the 1964 Summer Games had showcased the country’s postwar economic recovery.

The Diamond Princess ruined all that. The virus-hit cruise ship docked at its home berth of Yokohama on Feb. 3. The ship had been on a two-week tour that took it to Hong Kong, Vietnam, and Taiwan, with one passenger taken off in Hong Kong and later diagnosed as having the virus.

Japanese officials ordered the ship under quarantine—a move that raised doubts over whether this would help to stop the spread of the virus or instead create an incubation center among the roughly 3,700 passengers and crew on board.

That controversy grew after Kentaro Iwata, a professor of infectious diseases at Kobe University, recorded a YouTube video on the ship in which he criticized the conditions as being inadequate to control new infections. Government officials shot back, producing data that they said demonstrated that most of the infections occurred before the lockdown and that the measures had helped to slow down the rate of infection. Iwata soon took down his videos, telling reporters that he had been assured that rules had been tightened and that “the role of the YouTube post was over.”
 
Adding further doubt, however, was a later revelation that some Japanese passengers had been allowed to leave without any further safeguards, while U.S. and other foreign passengers had been taken home to face two weeks more of isolation. To make matters worse, authorities admitted that 23 of the Japanese passengers had been allowed to leave without a final test. In all, more than 700 people have been reported as being infected on the ship, with four deaths.

Numbers for the rest of Japan have been less severe. The government says 210 people around the country have tested positive, considerably fewer than the 2,337 cases in South Korea, where President Moon Jae-in put the country on the highest alert level for an infectious disease outbreak.

Shigeru Omi, chief director of the Japan Community Health Care Organization and an expert in this field, acknowledged that “no system is perfect and Japan is no exception.” But he said that Japanese health officials and others are working around the clock and that Japan was now focusing on preventing further infection centers and in reducing mortality.

While the success of Japan’s approach has yet to be determined, there is no doubt that one of the casualties will be the economy.

Even before the outbreak, Japan was sliding toward a possible recession, with the gross domestic product off a surprisingly steep 6.3 percent at an annualized rate in the fourth quarter, hit by a downturn in consumption following an increase in the national sales tax.  The virus outbreak will almost certainly worsen the situation. Goldman Sachs estimates that the first quarter will see a fall of 0.3 percent, with an overall contraction of 0.4 percent for the year.

New measures announced Tuesday by the government will likely make this worse. In order to stop the creation of new “clusters” of infection, it is recommending that people avoid large groups or close contact with others over a long period. Forget candlelight dinners or boozy work outings as companies cancel planned parties.

Corporate Japan has fallen in line. Advertising giant Dentsu has told 5,000 workers at its headquarters to stay at home (but keep working) after one employee tested positive for the virus. Cosmetics group Shiseido has meanwhile told 8,000 employees to telework. Another major Japanese group has told employees to avoid groups of six or more, and others are cutting all travel.

The economic effects are mounting. The Tokyo stock market fell 9.6 percent in the week. A major international hotel chain says it is operating at 40 percent of capacity, half the usual level, with the worst yet to come, while some restaurants in central Tokyo report a 50 percent decline in bookings. Major sporting events are also on hold with the Japan soccer league abandoning all its planned matches through March 15. The Tokyo marathon, which typically attracts some 30,000 runners from around the world, has been scaled back to only the small professional group. Even Tokyo Disneyland, one of the most popular resorts in the world, has shut its doors for at least two weeks.

A controversial case has put an unwelcome spotlight on the Japanese justice system.

Inbound tourism, which had been one of the big successes for the Abe government, is likely to be the biggest loser in all this. Chinese tourists, who accounted for 40 percent of spending by foreign visitors last year, have stopped coming, with tour groups now banned. South Koreans, already mad at Japan over trade restrictions last year, are also staying away in droves. Together the two neighbors accounted for almost half of the 32 million visitors last year.

There are also some murmurings that perhaps Tokyo is not the place to hold the Summer Olympic and Paralympic Games—if they’re held anywhere in what may turn out to be a pandemic year. International Olympic Committee (IOC) member Dick Pound of Canada told the Associated Press that there is likely a two- to three-month window to assess the situation. That’s not the official view, at least for now, with a spokesman in Tokyo saying that “with regard to this member’s comment, the IOC has responded that this is not their official position, and that the IOC is proceeding with preparations toward the games as scheduled.”

All this is slashing away at Abe’s popularity. His approval rating, already hit by a number of scandals, took its biggest decline in two years, according to a Feb. 15-16 poll by Japanese news agency Kyodo News. It found the support level for Abe’s cabinet was now 41 percent, down 8.3 points from the previous poll in January. Among those surveyed, 82.5 percent said they were concerned about the negative economic impact of the outbreak.

This follows something of a pattern in Japan, where despite an image of teamwork and an ability to pull out of tough times, voters typically blame their leaders for problems. Abe saw this in the summer of 2018, when torrential rains caused widespread flooding and landslides, leaving over 200 dead. A perceived lackluster response was met with a 46 percent disapproval rating, helping to push the government’s overall rating down 7 points to 45 percent. Even more dramatically, the now opposition Democratic Party saw its fortunes hit by a perceived poor response to the earthquake, tsunami and nuclear emergency in March 2011. Despite bringing on a new prime minister, the party suffered a massive defeat in the December 2012 that brought Abe to power. It has never recovered since then and its successor party now polls at less than 10 percent.

Abe’s carefully nurtured overtures to Xi may also face a setback with the possible cancellation of Xi’s planned trip in April, the first by a Chinese leader since 2008. Officially, both countries insist the trip is still on.

Abe came under further criticism this week when he abruptly announced that the government was asking all schools in Japan to close until the end of the term in late March. Japanese media quoted education officials as being unaware of the plan, with one quoted as saying, “I can’t believe it. There was no consideration for people at the schools.” Children have been among the least-hit groups by the virus, and critics say the measure will only complicate the lives of medical workers and others who will now have to care for them.

The Abe team has managed to navigate such crises before, including a favoritism scandal over the sale of land to a nationalist elementary school supported by Abe and his wife. This time could be different, however. Abe’s term as head of the ruling party is due to expire in September 2021, making the prime minister something of a lame duck. There had been talk that the rules could again be changed to keep Abe in power, but that has faded as the problems have mounted.

He could have one last rescue, however. One of Japan’s key concerns is how to deal with a second Trump administration. Abe is seen as being deft at flattering Trump while trying to put off the president’s demands on the trade and defense fronts for as long as possible. The recent Kyodo poll found that 71 percent expected an unfavorable impact on Japan if Trump is reelected. If that happens, some politicians have suggested that Abe might still be the best man for the job. His performance through the coronavirus crisis could turn out to be a defining moment of his years in power—whether he gets on top of the crisis or gets overwhelmed by it.



Business /  Economy Japan could face year-long slump if 'cursed' Olympics canceled by Yoshiaki Nohara and Yuko Takeo
A canceled or postponed Olympics would likely result in Japan’s economy shrinking for the longest stretch since the global financial crisis, according to some economists.

Ahead of the arrival of the still-flickering Olympic flame on Friday, economists contacted by Bloomberg said a scrapped or delayed Tokyo Games would probably mean the economy shrinking for a fourth quarter straight.


“I think it’s almost certain that the economy will contract in the first and second quarters. So now the question for everyone is whether it also shrinks in the July-September quarter,” Nomura Research Institute economist Takahide Kiuchi said.

The gloomy view of Kiuchi and other economists is the latest indication of how quickly Japan’s Olympic year has transformed from an opportunity to showcase its attractions as a top tourist destination for 40 million visitors, to a year revealing the fragility of its economy and its dependence on global growth.

The world’s third-largest economy shrank at an annualized pace of 7.1 percent in the last three months of 2019 after a sales tax hike and a typhoon walloped consumption and disrupted production. That put the economy in a highly vulnerable state as the coronavirus started spreading around the world.

IOC to start discussions on possible Tokyo 2020 postponement
Japan's economy at critical juncture as coronavirus puts growth and Olympics at risk
Abe to hold talks with IOC chief as Tokyo Olympics head toward delay
As virus cases surge, Tokyo governor says lockdown may be only way to stem rise
Like 'a canary in a coal mine': Olympic torch relay could foreshadow postponement of Tokyo Games
Tokyo organizers quietly plan for potential Olympic delay: sources
2020 Tokyo Olympics in doubt as Abe hints at delay for first time
In coronavirus-hit world, sponsors to stand by delayed Tokyo Olympics

Prime Minister Shinzo Abe’s administration and the International Olympic Committee have tried to damp down growing speculation that the games won’t be held as scheduled as lockdowns of cities across the world cast doubt on the ability of athletes and visitors to attend the sports spectacle.

Finance Minister Taro Aso on Wednesday characterized 2020 as another “cursed” year, citing the war-canceled 1940 Olympics and the boycotted Moscow Olympics in 1980 as examples. “There’s been a problem every 40 years. That’s a fact,” he said in the Diet.

For former Bank of Japan board member Kiuchi, the main scenario is for no games in 2020 and a yearlong sequence of quarterly contractions through September.

BNP Paribas economist Ryutaro Kono shares a similar outlook.

“There’s a very good chance that the Olympics will be scrapped,” Kono said. He expects the economy to contract 2.6 percent this year, compared with his original view of a modest expansion of about 0.5 percent. A Bloomberg survey of economists published March 12 predicts a 0.5 percent contraction.

To some extent Japan’s economy has already enjoyed some of the main material benefits of Olympics-related development and investment, such as the brand new National Stadium. A delay or canceling would deprive it of a hoped-for swell in sentiment, consumption and tourism this year.

The staging of a successful games would also have enhanced Japan’s “soft power.” In 2017, the Tokyo Metropolitan Government estimated the positive economic impact of the Olympics would total ¥32 trillion through 2030 from 2013, when Tokyo won the bid by pitching a “compact” games.

“The Olympics has a largely symbolic meaning. The cancellation by itself will only shave 0.1 to 0.2 percentage point off GDP, but the situation where we can’t hold the Olympics would mean that Japan is continuing to grapple with the virus, and that other nations including the U.S. and Europe are in a deep slump,” Kono said.

Economists including Yuichi Kodama at Meiji Yasuda Life Insurance and Junichi Makino, chief economist at SMBC Nikko Securities Inc. and Shuji Tonouchi at Mitsubishi UFJ Morgan Stanley flagged the difficulty of forming an opinion that wasn’t subject to change with the rapid news flow.

“The short-term impact for Japan is going to be worse than for the global financial crisis. But the thing is that each time I change my outlook, the situation worsens further,” Kodama said.



Japan's Economy Sicker Than Expected and Before Any Virus Effect The world's third-largest economy is likely to now be in recession, and Japanese investors have sensibly switched into defensive sectors and low-volatility stocks.
Stocks quotes in this article: HMC, NSANY, RNLSY, PUGOY, DNFGY, GELYY, MSFT, AMZN
Japan's economy is sicker than expected, new data shows this week, with the economy contracting at an annualized rate of 6.3% in the December quarter. Even without factoring in the coronavirus scare, which threatens to disrupt this summer's Tokyo Olympics, it looks like the world's third-largest economy is now in a recession.

And we must factor in the coronavirus scare. Of the Japanese companies with operations in China, 87.1% suspended production in response to the emergency, the Nikkei reports, and 56.2% are experiencing continued disruption to their Chinese operations. Some 70 Japanese large-cap companies get at least 10% of their sales in China, according to Nomura.

There will also be disruption within Japan itself. Outside China, it is the country with the most coronavirus cases, the count currently at 621. While the vast majority of those have occurred on the Diamond Princess cruise ship, there are also signs of community-spread infections among the 79 other infections in Japan.

An 80-year-old woman died last Thursday in Kanagawa Prefecture southwest of Tokyo. She was the mother-in-law of a taxi driver who has also tested positive for the Covid-19 virus. No one is too sure which way the transmission spread between the two, or how they got infected. Here in Hong Kong, we've just had the second virus-linked fatality in the city.

Japanese shares suffered a two-day fall after Monday morning's gross domestic product data, with the Topix index of all major Tokyo shares down 2.4% through Tuesday's close. Even with a mild 0.4% rally on Wednesday, the Topix is down 4.3% since the extent of the coronavirus impact became clear on Jan. 22.

The poor sentiment was only compounded by the GDP figures. The Japanese economy slowed down far faster than the 3.7% drop anticipated in a Reuters poll, thanks to a worse-than-expected impact from an increase in the sales tax.

The quarterly drop was the worst since Q2 2014, the last time Japan increased its sales tax, which it is doing to cut into the country's huge fiscal deficit. It has the highest debt burden of any G20 nation. This sales-tax increase, from 8% to 10%, was expected to hurt less than the 2014 increase, when it went from 5% to 8%. But it's clear the impact has nevertheless been underestimated.

A Q1 economic decline seems assured, and may be worse than the December quarter. Japan will bear the heaviest burden of travel restrictions on Chinese tourists, resulting in US$1.3 billion in lost tourism revenue in this March quarter, according to a preliminary forecast from the International Civil Aviation Organization, a United Nations agency. Thailand runs a narrow second, with US$1.2 billion in lost travel-related business due to the virus. Airlines will suffer US$4 billion to US$5 billion in lost revenue globally, the ICAO predicts.

A number of studies such as this 2014 McGill University research have shown that we remember bad news far better than good, the so-called "negativity bias." This has not really applied on the economic front this week in Asia, because there was only bad news. At least, that's what I recall.

Although Singapore raised its Q4 growth from 0.8% to 1%, the Lion City has cut its forecast for full-year growth. It may even turn negative, with Singapore citing a range of -0.5% to 1.5% for 2020.

Thailand, meanwhile, said its economy grew at the slowest rate for five years in 2019. It has forecast growth of 1.5% to 2.3% for this year, bracing for that US$1.2 billion tourism hit. South Korea will likely lower its forecast for 2020 growth, and Moody's has just slashed its own forecast for Korea from 2.1% to 1.9% due to Covid-19 concerns.

For Japan, the sales tax, a number of typhoons and the U.S. trade wars all hurt Q4 consumption. U.S. President Donald Trump has at times attacked Japan, particularly over auto sales, and the friction with China also disrupts many Japanese companies with operations there.

To make matters worse, Honda Motor (HMC) and Nissan Motor (NSANY) have large joint-venture auto factories in Wuhan, the center of China's car trade. Nissan is attempting to resume China production outside Hubei, but isn't sure when the Wuhan plant will resume.

Renault (RNLSY) and Peugeot-Citroen (PUGOY) also both have factories in Wuhan, as do the Chinese automakers SAIC Motor SH:600104, Dongfeng Motor Group (DNFGY) and Geely Automobile Holdings (GELYY) . Around them are thousands of suppliers and smaller autoparts manufacturers.

Nissan faces the greatest challenges. It is still contending with the fallout over fugitive ex-chairman Carlos Ghosn. The company last week posted its first quarterly loss for almost a decade, and cut its full-year profit forecast by 43%.

Yet investors outside Asia are blithely carrying on like little of import is happening in Asia. European shares have this week hit an all-time high; the S&P 500 and Nasdaq are also setting and resetting records.

It is not yet clear what will puncture this bubble. Maybe the warnings from global health-care experts, who are instructing that we should be abandoning efforts to quarantine this virus and focusing instead on treatment and early detection, may finally sink in.

For Japan, investors are at least favoring defensive stocks and low-volatility holdings.

Property companies and drugmakers have held up the best, both sectors up 4.4% since January 22, while utilities have advanced 2.0%. All three are defensive plays, with pharmaceuticals having the added advantage of likely business out of the coronavirus crisis.

Growth stocks were the star performers in Japan at the start of the year. But quantitative analysis of "factor performance" by Nomura shows that the pattern has completely reversed due to the Wuhan virus. Growth has been abandoned, with investors taking refuge in low-vol stocks.

Electrical appliance makers, and makers of high-precision instruments, stand to suffer the most, Nomura anticipates, with operating profits likely to fall 4.7%. Raw materials and chemicals will also suffer thanks to bottlenecks in supply and lower demand. Of course, retailers and restaurants will be hit both by the absence of Chinese consumers, who account for 37% of all tourism spending in Japan, as well as any reduction in local demand.

Nomura does not believe the negative impacts of the coronavirus are yet accounted for by the market. If the coronavirus disruption in terms of demand and supply chain disruption dents the Japanese economy by another 0.5% in the March quarter, profits for that quarter will by dealt an 8% blow. That would reduce full-year earnings by 2%, and should depress Japanese stocks by about 2%.

I'd advise investors in other parts of the world to run similar numbers. Markets in the West are not being realistic about the long-running and far-reaching impacts of a major disruption to the "factory to the world." Even if the virus itself isn't making itself felt where you are, the impact on companies soon will.

Super-large-cap tech stocks have been the stellar U.S. performers, particularly Microsoft (MSFT) and Amazon (AMZN) . That's partly thanks to earnings, partly thanks to their presumed insulation from the worst of the virus. But this may be masking greater weakness among even U.S. equities.

"The sharp rebound by U.S. stocks may seem somewhat surprising, but could also be interpreted to mean that investors are at the mercy of an unpredictable infectious disease," Nomura's team notes.




Japan raises economic growth forecast for next fiscal year
TOKYO (Reuters) - Japan’s government raised its economic growth forecast for the next fiscal year, helped by an expected boost from a $122 billion fiscal package that would help cushion the hit from weaker global demand.

FILE PHOTO: Pedestrians make their way in a business district in Tokyo, Japan May 16, 2018. REUTERS/Kim Kyung-Hoon 
The economy is now expected to expand 1.4% in price-adjusted real terms in the fiscal year starting April 2020, according to the Cabinet Office’s projections, approved by the Cabinet on Wednesday.

That marked an upgrade from the government’s previous forecast of 1.2% growth issued in July. The government kept its estimated 0.9% growth for the current fiscal year ending in March 2020.

The upgrade largely stemmed from an improvement in domestic demand due to stronger corporate investment and a boost to growth from public spending from the fiscal package approved by the Cabinet this month.

The government expects capital spending to grow a robust 2.7% next fiscal year, compared to 1.9% in the previous assessment in July. Public demand was seen adding 0.5 percentage point to GDP growth in fiscal 2020, up from 0.2 percentage point seen previously.

The boost from the fiscal package is expected to more than offset weakness in external demand as slowing global growth threatens to leave a deeper mark on the economy.

The government expects a 0.1 percentage point drag from external demand next fiscal year, compared to a positive 0.2 percentage point contribution seen previously.

The downgrade largely stems from a weaker rebound in exports, which the government sees expanding at a pace of 2.4% next fiscal year, down from 4.3% seen previously.

The government’s projections come as the Bank of Japan is expected to keep monetary policy on hold on Thursday as the fiscal package and progress in U.S.-China trade talks take some immediate pressure off the central bank to support growth.

The Cabinet Office projected overall consumer inflation, which includes volatile fresh food and energy costs, at 0.6% for this fiscal year and 0.8% for the following year - remaining far from the BOJ’s elusive 2% price target.

Japan’s economy expanded at an annualized 1.8% in the third quarter because of stronger consumer and business spending, but analysts expect a contraction in the current quarter due to the increasing external and internal pressures.

Weighing on the outlook are a slowdown in China’s economy and a nationwide sales tax hike in October, which appears to have hit private consumption harder than policymakers initially thought.

The Cabinet Office said private consumption will grow just 0.6% in fiscal 2019, down from 0.9% seen in the previous assessment in July, due to a decline in consumer sentiment and lower summer bonuses.

For fiscal 2019 and fiscal 2020, the Cabinet Office forecast nominal economic growth of 1.8% and 2.1, respectively. Higher nominal growth estimates point to government expectations for greater tax revenue.




The Japanese Economy in 2020: A Recovery Continues Despite Uncertainties Economy Society Politics Jan 15, 2020
Global uncertainties involving the United States and China and a potential downswing after the Tokyo Olympic Games are giving rise to pessimism about Japan’s economy in 2020. Despite such concerns, the author, a leading economist in Japan, predicts that Japan’s economy will continue its gradual recovery in 2020.

In the Bank of Japan’s December Tankan (Short-Term Economic Survey of Enterprises) released on December 13, 2019, large manufacturers’ assessment of business conditions (percentage of enterprises responding “favorable” minus the percentage responding “unfavorable”) was 0, down from the +5 reported in September. Business confidence has worsened for four straight quarters, reaching a low unseen since the –8 of March 2013. The worsening of the confidence index in December was influenced by the slowing of the world economy ensuing from the US-China trade war and by the suspension of factory operations resulting from Typhoon Hagibis and other natural disasters.

The outlook of large manufacturers to March 2020 was flat at 0. The survey period of the December Tankan being November 13 to December 12, however, was a case of bad timing. Had the survey reflected the “phase one” trade deal that the United States and China reached on December 13, which eased global economic uncertainties for the time being, and had it reflected the results of the general election in Britain on December 12, the outlook to March would likely have been a positive figure.

Meanwhile, large non-manufacturers’ assessment of business conditions fell 1 point from +21 in September to +20 in December. Despite the increase of the consumption tax, this index has remained in the twenties for 12 consecutive quarters. Business sentiment appears to have been supported by the reward points program for cashless purchases introduced with the consumption tax increase and by inbound demand generated by the Rugby World Cup hosted by Japan. The business conditions index of small nonmanufacturers was +7 in December, another positive figure over successive quarters. The sentiment of nonmanufacturers holding to high levels suggests that domestic demand is firm.

General business conditions portrayed by the index for all enterprises and industries was +4 in December, down 4 points from the +8 in September. This was, however, a firmer figure than the +2 forecast for December in the September survey. Broadly speaking, companies with a favorable view of the economy continue to outnumber those with an unfavorable view. In the December Tankan, all enterprises and industries foresee a firm increase of 5.0% in capital spending plans (including software R&D) in fiscal 2019.

The Effect of Stimulus Measures
The consensus forecast for real GDP growth in the December ESP Forecast (averaged from the predictions of private-sector economists polled by the Japan Center for Economic Research) was 0.49% for fiscal 2020 (ending March 31, 2021). The average for the eight highest forecasts was 0.75% and that for the eight lowest was 0.26%. This represents an upward revision from the consensus forecast of 0.39% in the November survey, where the average for the eight highest forecasts was 0.65% and that for the eight lowest was 0.08%. The consensus view is that the economy will continue to grow in fiscal 2020, although at an extremely gradual pace.

The higher forecast reflects a stimulus package of ¥13.2 trillion in fiscal expenditures that the Cabinet approved on December 5, 2019. Once private-sector expenditures are included, the size of the stimulus will come to about ¥26 trillion. The stimulus package includes spending for (1) disaster restoration and recovery and safety and security improvements, (2) priority support of people attempting to overcome the economy’s downside risks, and (3) investment in the future and the maintenance and improvement of economic vitality following the Tokyo Olympic and Paralympic Games.

The majority view in the December ESP Forecast is that Japanese and US interest rates will trend at their current levels to the end of 2020, and monetary easing is expected to continue.

Despite some uncertainties, Japan’s economy is likely to continue recovering in 2020, as the faltering of external demand and the downturn of the manufacturing industry come to an end and as domestic demand remains firm. Factors contributing to this outlook are (1) expectations that foreign demand will rebound with the easing of current uncertainties about the global economy, (2) the bottoming of the inventory cycle for the electronic parts and devices industry from investments in next-generation 5G base stations and from the development of new smartphone models, (3) the ongoing firmness of domestic demand, (4) government stimulus measures, and (5) the 2020 Tokyo Olympic and Paralympic Games.

Business Sentiment Hit By Higher Consumption Tax
I have developed a consumption tax/tax increase diffusion index using the Economy Watchers Survey (Figure 1). This index shows how respondents view the economy relative to the consumption tax increase based on their comments. Figures of 50 or more indicate a favorable view of the economy.

Figure 1: Consumption Tax/Tax Increase Comments in the Economy Watchers Survey
Survey Number of comments DI January 2019 Current DI 40 51.9 Future DI 196 49.1 February Current DI 44 49.4 Future DI 190 50.5 March Current DI 58 48.3 Future DI 216 49.5 April Current DI 60 44.2 Future DI 284 51.9 May Current DI 54 45.8 Future DI 338 48.4 June Current DI 103 45.6 Future DI 450 48.2 July Current DI 124 43.5 Future DI 578 39.1 August Current DI 229 45.4 Future DI 714 30.7 September Current DI 548 50.5 Future DI 796 29.4 October Current DI 580 30.1 Future DI 455 41.8 November Current DI 414 34.1 Future DI 303 44.2
Source: Prepared by the author based on the Economy Watchers Survey of the Cabinet Office.

The number of respondents for current business conditions rose from 40 in the January 2019 survey to 548 in September and to 580 in October, after which their number declined to 414 in November. It is reasonable to think that interest grew as the date of the consumption tax increase approached and then fell off after the tax hike.

The current diffusion index was 50.5 in the September survey, surpassing 50, the dividing line between favorable and unfavorable sentiment. Forty-three respondents said that conditions had improved, and nearly all mentioned the acceleration of demand before the tax increase. The index, however, slumped to 30.1 in October following the consumption tax hike, after which it improved slightly to 34.1 in November.

The future diffusion index had 196 respondents in the January survey, which increased to 796 in September, when the future index was a low 29.4. Respondents of 455 in October fell to 303 in November, and an index of 41.8 in October improved to 44.2 in November. This likely indicates a widespread view that consumption expenditures would bottom out after faltering momentarily following the consumption tax increase.

Consumer Confidence of the Elderly Bottoms
The Consumer Confidence Index in the Cabinet Office’s Consumer Confidence Survey has declined since October 2018, one year before the increase of the consumption tax, mainly pulled down by sentiment among the elderly. This seasonally adjusted index concerns households of two or more persons, and an index of 50 or more signifies that consumer confidence is positive. In October 2019, the index rose 0.6 points over the prior month to 36.2, bringing its year-long decline to an end. Further cheer was provided by the index climbing 2.5 points to 38.7 in November. Consumer confidence has tended to improve in past instances when the consumption tax was raised, which was also the case this time. It is reasonable to say that the consumer confidence of the elderly has bottomed after a sustained period of weakening. 

Figure 2 compares the composite diffusion index on business conditions expressing the consensus view of economic forecasters in the November and December ESP Forecast. This index exceeds 50, the dividing line between an expanding and contracting economy, in July–September 2019. It then tumbles in October–December 2019, when the consumption tax was raised. The index then returns to a level above 50 in January–March 2020, and in the most recent December survey, it is 80 or more in April–June 2020 and in July–September 2020. 

The index for October–December 2020, however, was somewhat less than 50 in surveys to November due to concerns about a downswing following the Olympic and Paralympic Games. Now that a stimulus package extending beyond the Olympic Games has been approved, the index has surpassed 50 in the December survey. In 2021, the index rises further in the January–March, April–June, and July–September quarters. The consensus view of economists is that the gradual recovery of the economy will continue.


The Economy Foretold by NHK’s Year-End Song Festival
The economy shows a close relationship with the popular year-end song festival that NHK, Japan’s public broadcaster, broadcasts on December 31. In each of the years that Kitajima Saburō cheerfully sang “Matsuri” (Festival) at this festival, the economy was in an expansion phase at year-end. The popular boy band Arashi, which will cease activities by the end of 2020, is also closely linked to year-end economic conditions.

Arashi appeared for the eleventh time at the song festival in 2019. In each of the years that Arashi has done so, the economy was in an expansion phase at year-end. While the views of economists are divided about the year-end direction of the economy, in the December ESP Forecast, 25 out of 34 economists, or more than 70%, viewed the economy as expanding.

The economy has for the most part expanded in the years since Arashi debuted at the song festival in 2009. The one exception was 2012, when the economy peaked in March and turned downward. The economy then bottomed in November and was expanding again on December 31. Arashi has sung medleys at the song festival, and many of the songs selected were cheerful and upbeat, like “Happiness.” In 2019, Arashi will debut “Kaito” (Kite), NHK’s 2020 Olympic theme song.

The year-end song festival in 2020 will likely be Arashi’s final performance before the group ceases activities. Given the relationship seen between the economy and Arashi and the song festival, it is possible to say that there is a high probability that the expansion will continue at the very least to 2020 year-end.

(Originally published in Japanese. Banner photo: The Marunouchi district of Tokyo. © Pixta.)

Consumption Tax/Tax Increase Diffusion Index

The author selected comments referring to the consumption tax or tax increases in the reasons given for business condition judgments in the Economy Watchers Survey. A rising number of such comments indicates greater interest in the effect of the consumption tax hike on the economy. Comments were categorized and quantified, where “favorable” was given 1 point, “somewhat favorable” 0.75 points, “unchanged” 0.5 points, “somewhat unfavorable” 0.25 points, and “unfavorable” 0 points. The weighted average of the sum of these figures is the consumption tax/tax increase diffusion index. An index of 50 divides favorable from unfavorable sentiment.
