Thailand announces market steps to ease coronavirus impact
   
The Bank of Thailand will continue to provide liquidity to the government bond market through bond buying. PHOTO: AFP 
Published
Mar 22, 2020, 11:09 pm SGT
More
Linkedin  FB Messenger  Telegram  Reddit  WeChat  Pinterest  Print  Purchase Article 
Permalink:
 
BANGKOK (REUTERS) - Thailand introduced measures on Sunday (March 22) to ensure sufficient liquidity in the bond market amid the spread of the coronavirus that has infected almost 600 in the country.

The Bank of Thailand (BOT) has set up a facility to provide liquidity for mutual funds through commercial banks, its governor Veerathai Santiprabhob told a joint news conference with the finance ministry and the Securities and Exchange Commission.

The facility will remain open until market conditions return to normal.

The BOT's preliminary estimate of eligible bond mutual funds is approximately 1 trillion baht (S$44.3 billion), he said.

A separate, corporate bond stabilisation fund worth 70 billion to 100 billion baht will be set up to invest in high quality, newly issued bonds by corporates that cannot fully roll over maturing corporate bonds, Mr Veerathai said.

The BOT will continue to provide liquidity to the government bond market through bond buying, he said.

"These measures are expected to provide liquidity and help the normal functioning of the financial market and help build investors' confidence", he said.

"Even though the Thai financial system remains strong, with commercial banks holding healthy levels of capital and liquidity reserves, the liquidity stress and the resulting irregularity in the global financial market have begun to affect the Thai financial market," he said.

The finance ministry will also propose measures to the cabinet on Tuesday to help people affected by the virus, a government official said.

Earlier, the country announced measures for the stock market , including setting up a support fund and revising rules to ease volatility.

JUMPING CASES OF INFECTIONS
Thailand on Sunday reported 188 new cases of infections, taking the total to 599. One person has died.



Thai Finance Ministry to adjust growth projection for 2020
Thailand  

A woman, wearing a facemask amid concerns over the spread of the Covid-19 (coronavirus) walking in a empty department store in Bangkok on Saturday (Feb 29). The Thai Ministry of Finance said on Saturday that it will readjust the country's economic growth projection for 2020 in April in the wake of severe drought, flagging economy and strong baht currency, as well as the recent Covid-19 outbreak.- AFP

BANGKOK: The Thai Ministry of Finance said on Saturday (Feb 29) that it will readjust the country's economic growth projection for 2020 in April in the wake of severe drought, flagging economy and strong baht currency, as well as the recent Covid-19 outbreak.

"It is highly possible that the forecast of 41.1 million tourist arrivals for this year will not be met although the full impacts from Covid-19 (coronavirus) outbreak cannot be accurately assessed for the time being," Wutthipong Chittangsakul, deputy director of the Ministry's Fiscal Policy Office, said.

Wutthipong said that it is too early to forecast whether the global outbreaks would ease off in the next three months as earlier anticipated, because it depends on the capabilities of each country to cope with the Covid-19 epidemic.

He noted, however, positive signs in the Thai export sector, which has increased by 3.4% in January, were in line with an increasing demand for Thai products, such as motorcycles and spare parts, furniture and sugar from its major trading partners, namely Singapore, the United States and China.

Other positive factors were the disbursement of 2020 budget and the weakening of the baht currency, which will help boost exports, said Wutthipong.

However, he pointed out that private investment in the industrial and agricultural sectors were showing signs of slowdown.- Xinhua/Asian News Network
Article type: free
User access status:
Tags / Keywords: Thailand , Economic Growth , Lower Projection



Building a nature-positive economy
Over half of global GDP is moderately or highly dependent on nature, says a World Economic Forum report

[Image: Men fish in Songkhla Lake at the break of dawn. (Photo by Karnjana Karnjanatawe)]   Men fish in Songkhla Lake at the break of dawn. (Photo by Karnjana Karnjanatawe)
Businesses are more dependent on nature and biodiversity than they may realise, according to The New Nature Economy Report produced by the World Economic Forum (WEF).

An analysis of 163 industry sectors and their supply chains found that more than half of the world's GDP is moderately or highly dependent on nature and its "services".

Pollination, water quality and disease control are just three examples of the services that an ecosystem can provide.

Economic value generation amounting to US$44 trillion -- over half the world's total GDP -- is moderately or highly dependent on nature and its services and, as a result, exposed to risks from nature loss.

Construction ($4 trillion), agriculture ($2.5 trillion) and food and beverages ($1.4 trillion) are the three largest industries that depend most on nature. Combined, their value is roughly twice the size of the German economy.

Such industries rely on either the direct extraction of resources from forests and oceans or the provision of ecosystem services such as healthy soils, clean water, pollination and a stable climate.

As nature loses its capacity to provide such services, these industries could be significantly disrupted. Industries highly dependent on nature generate 15% of global GDP ($13 trillion), while moderately dependent industries generate 37% ($31 trillion).

The WEF report, produced in collaboration with PwC UK, found that many industries have significant "hidden dependencies" on nature in their supply chain and may be more at risk of disruption than expected.

For instance, six industries have less than 15% of their direct gross value added (GVA) that is highly dependent on nature, yet over 50% of their supply chains' GVA is highly or moderately nature-dependent. The industries are chemicals and materials; aviation, travel and tourism; real estate; mining and metals; supply chain and transport; and retail, consumer goods and lifestyle.

In terms of global exposure, larger economies have the highest absolute amounts of GDP in nature-dependent sectors: $2.7 trillion in China, $2.4 trillion in the European Union and $2.1 trillion in the United States.

Consequently, even regions with a relatively lower share of their economy at high exposure to nature loss can hold a substantial share of the global exposure and, therefore, cannot be complacent.

"We need to reset the relationship between humans and nature," said Dominic Waughray, managing director of the WEF. "Damage to nature from economic activity can no longer be considered an 'externality'. This report shows how exposure to nature loss is both material to all business sectors and is an urgent and non-linear risk to our collective future economic security."

"Given the scale and severity of nature loss, business needs a wake-up call," said Celine Herweijer, partner and global innovation and sustainability leader with PwC UK. "The cascading physical, regulatory and legal, market and reputation risks we see mean nature risk now needs to be a mainstream issue for corporate enterprise risk management."

PATH FORWARD
Nature-related risks can be incorporated within existing ERM (enterprise risk management) and ESG (environmental, social and governance) processes, investment decision-making, and financial and non-financial reporting.

Many large businesses have already adopted the framework proposed by the Financial Stability Board's Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures (TCFD) for identifying, measuring and managing climate risks. This could be adapted for managing nature risks.

"It is important to note that there is a path forward," Mr Waughray said. "Businesses can formulate specific pathways to help 'bend the curve' of nature loss and damage within the decade by slowing down and halting biodiversity loss, then restoring nature and -- as a massive co-benefit -- contribute to achieving net-zero emissions by mid-century through smart nature-based solutions, all in the same package."

Costs are likely to rise for businesses that have not begun to include nature at the core of their enterprise operations, he said. Businesses that ignore this trend will be left behind, while those that have embraced the transformation will exploit new opportunities.

"Natural disasters have caused a significant impact to the business community, the wider economy and the general public, including people like us," said Sira Intarakumthornchai, CEO of PwC Thailand. "Needless to say, 2020 looks to be another difficult year after we saw record-high temperatures in Antarctica, the devastating bushfires in Australia and the dust pollution in and around Bangkok.

"The coronavirus, Covid-19, also presents challenges similar to those of a natural disaster. These examples underline the need for cooperation in using natural resources responsibly and promoting sustainability in various sectors."





Thai economic outlook among Asia’s weakest 
31
Business
Thai economic outlook among Asia’s weakest
published : 16 Mar 2020 at 11:05

writer: Bloomberg News  

997
31
[Image: People wear facemasks amid concerns over the spread of the Covid-19 novel coronavirus at a shopping mall in Bangkok on March 10, 2020. (AFP photo)]   People wear facemasks amid concerns over the spread of the Covid-19 novel coronavirus at a shopping mall in Bangkok on March 10, 2020. (AFP photo)
Thailand is preparing to restrict some aspects of daily life after the country’s biggest spike in coronavirus cases, further damaging one of Asia’s weakest economic outlooks.

The steps to be considered Monday include placing more curbs on foreign arrivals, cancelling events with big crowds and closing entertainment venues deemed risky for spreading the virus. Confirmed cases jumped by 32 on Sunday to 114, sparking fears of a bigger outbreak and some panic buying of groceries.

The Thai economy was already reeling from a collapse in the critical tourism sector amid lock-downs worldwide to slow the transmission of the disease known as Covid-19. A drought and delayed public spending are additional blows, leaving Thailand with the highest odds of recession among Asian nations -- at 30% -- after Japan, according to data compiled by Bloomberg.

“We may need a sudden stop of economic activity, like China, as it proved effective in tackling the spread,” said Somprawin Manprasert, chief economist at Bank of Ayudhya Plc, a Thai unit of Mitsubishi UFJ Financial Group. “With such disruption, the economy will likely contract this year.”

Stock Slump
Investors have taken fright, making the benchmark SET equity index emerging Asia’s worst performer with a drop of about 29% so far in 2020. The baht has tumbled almost 6% against the dollar over the same period, the second-largest decline in an Asian basket tracked by Bloomberg.

Prime Minister Prayut Chan-o-cha’s ruling coalition last week rolled out stimulus steps designed to deliver a 400 billion baht economic boost, but their effectiveness is in doubt after previous packages fizzled.

The Bank of Thailand’s scope to follow in the footsteps of the US Federal Reserve by slashing borrowing costs to near zero, from the current 1%, may be limited by rules making 0.5% an effective lower bound.

Contingency Plan
Sunday’s abrupt jump in virus cases raised the specter of widespread community transmission of the kind that sickened thousands of people in nations such as China, South Korea, Iran and Italy.

Gen Prayut said Sunday that officials are mulling contingency options in case infections climb, such as setting up a hospital specifically for Covid-19 patients. Operators of riskier entertainment venues like pubs and sports stadiums could be ordered to close, he said.

“Today, health is the most important issue,” he told reporters in Bangkok.

Tourism accounts for about a fifth of the economy, but the government estimates arrivals may drop 24% from last year, to 30 million people.

Citigroup has chopped its Thai growth forecast to 0.2% for this year from 2.2%, while Bangkok-based brokerage Phatra Securities Plc predicts a 0.4% contraction.

“There’s going to be a big trade off,” Bank of Ayudhya’s Somprawin said. “Economic losses, for the control of the epidemic.”






Sluggish economy brings back poverty in Thailand

[Image: A man wearing a facemask walks with an umbrella amid concerns over the spread of the COVID-19 novel coronavirus walks along a road in Bangkok on March 6, 2020. (Photo by Jack Taylor / AFP)]

BANGKOK: The number of Thais living in poverty has fallen dramatically over the past 30 years but the downward trend is now reversing with the sluggish economy.

In 1988, the percentage of Thais living in poverty was over 65 per cent but it has progressively fallen to under 10 per cent in 2018.

However, according to a new World Bank report, that trend has reversed in recent years with stalled household incomes and consumption bringing a rise in poverty.

Between 2015 and 2018, the poverty rate in Thailand increased from 7.2 per cent to 9.8 per cent while the number of Thais living in poverty rose from 4.85 million to more than 6.7 million.

The rise in poverty in 2018 was widespread, occurring in every region and 61 out of the 77 provinces in Thailand.

The Central and Northeast regions saw the number of poor increase by over half a million over the same period.

The conflict-affected South recorded the country's highest poverty rate for the first time in 2017.

The Bangkok Post said that the report found the spike in poverty coincided with emerging and shifting economic and environmental challenges.

Over the past few years, Thailand's growth rate has dropped lower than other large developing Asia-Pacific economies. During the fourth quarter in 2019, Thailand had among the lowest GDP growth rates in the region, at 2.7 per cent.

The severe drought has also impacted the livelihoods of farmers, who are already among the country's poorest.

World Bank Thailand country manager Birgit Hansl said recent poverty trends show that despite Thailand's level of economic development, households were still vulnerable to shocks and weak economic conditions.

"To meet Thailand's aspiration of achieving high income status, Thai households will need better protection from income shocks such as ill health, job loss and natural disasters. It will be equally important to support the creation of more productive and higher paying jobs."

Since poverty data were first published in 1988, Thailand's poverty rate has increased five times, most recently in 2016 and 2018 and previously around the time of financial crises in 1998, 2000 and 2008. Thailand is the only Asean country to experience several increases in poverty since 2000.

While Thailand performs better than its Asean peers on many international indicators of well-being – such as primary school enrolment, access to water, sanitation, and electricity, and has a low international extreme poverty rate – inequality remains an issue.

The poorest 40 per cent of the country suffered falling income and consumption during 2015-2017.

The trend among this group is related to falling labour income, with wage growth stagnating and revenues from farming and business dropping.

World Bank economist and author of the report, Judy Yang said a more nuanced picture of inequity and a better understanding of vulnerability will be needed to guide Thailand's next steps towards building a more prosperous society for all.

"Eliminating persistent pockets of poverty will require growth strategies that take into account short term risk mitigation and long term investment needs."

The report also calls for intervention and investment to help transform Thailand. It said in the short term, the country will need to reinforce its safety nets.

Vulnerable populations need to be better identified and swift action taken to create better jobs in a changing economy.

In the long term, investing in the next generation is key as the next generation will shrink due to demographic changes.

Every child will need to be given a fair shot and provided the health and education opportunities to reach their potential. This will help households escape the poverty trap, support an ageing population, and boost Thailand's growth prospects.




Bank of Thailand: More than one solution
Central bank governor highlights importance of addressing possible adverse effects on employment from Covid-19 outbreak

[Image: Bank of Thailand governor Veerathai Santiprabhob. (Photo by Jetjaras Na Ranong)]   Bank of Thailand governor Veerathai Santiprabhob. (Photo by Jetjaras Na Ranong)
Concerns over the economy entering a technical recession have overshadowed the importance of addressing possible adverse effects on employment from the Covid-19 outbreak, says the Bank of Thailand.

"Sometimes we wear the hat of an analyst that concentrates so much on the technical aspects of our forecasts and calculations. If we realise it is a technical recession, it is only a technical calculation," central bank governor Veerathai Santiprabhob told the Bangkok Post  in an exclusive interview.

"We should emphasise more how best to help mitigate the impact of the outbreak on the Thai economy or Thai society."

A technical recession is defined as two straight periods of quarterly contraction.


The employment market is facing a host of risks this year, with widespread drought, poor exports, the previous delay of the 2020 fiscal budget and the coronavirus outbreak weighing on jobs, warned the National Economic and Social Development Council (NESDC).

The NESDC reported 37.5 million people were employed in the fourth quarter of 2019, down 1.1% year-on-year. This marks the third consecutive quarter of decreases.

"It is unavoidable that certain segments of society will be significantly hit by the outbreak, particularly those in the tourism sector or small and medium-sized enterprises that have been affected by not only the outbreak, but also a series of adverse incidents since last year: trade tensions, the drought and the [previous] delay of the [fiscal 2020] budget," said Mr Veerathai.

The tourism sector, which accounts for more than 10% of GDP and has been the growth engine in recent years, is bearing the brunt of the viral outbreak.

After a 2.5% rise in tourist arrivals in January, February's figures likely slumped 40%, and a deeper decline is expected in March and April, Tourism Authority of Thailand governor Yuthasak Supasorn told Reuters.

"To what extent we can mitigate the impact depends on the collaboration of various agencies. At this point, I think we all should realise that there is no one solution. It is a coordinated effort [and] an urgent effort from all parties to help those that have been impacted," said Mr Veerathai.

At its first meeting in February, the central bank's Monetary Policy Committee unanimously voted to lower the policy interest rate by 25 basis points to a historic low of 1%, seen as a preemptive move to shore up economic growth battered by the Covid-19 epidemic.

The Bank of Thailand has asked banks and non-bank financial institutions under its supervision to temporarily lower the minimum amount due on credit cards to below 10% of the outstanding balance and loosen the ceiling for personal loan credit lines in case of emergency for new coronavirus-hit debtors.

The Finance and the Tourism and Sports ministries were expected to unveil measures for cabinet approval today to stimulate tourism and aid those affected by Covid-19, but the announcement could be deferred to next week.
