BEIJING

(Reuters) - China’s economy grew 6.0% in the fourth quarter of 2019 from a year earlier, official data showed on Friday, in line with expectations and steadying from the previous quarter’s pace.

FILE PHOTO: Cranes are seen above piles of steel pipes to be exported at a port in Lianyungang, Jiangsu province, China, December 1, 2015. REUTERS/China Daily 
The growth rate continued to hover at the weakest in nearly three decades.

The world’s second-largest economy grew an annual 6.1% in 2019, the slowest in 29 years, but still within the government’s target of 6-6.5%. Analysts had expected it to expand 6.1% in 2019, down from 6.6% in 2018.

Facing sluggish demand at home and abroad and escalating U.S. trade pressure, Chinese policymakers have been rolling out a stream of growth boosting measures over the past two years, while trying to contain financial and debt risks.

KEY POINTS
**Q4 GDP +6.0% y/y (f’cast +6.0%, 2018 +6.0%)

**Q4 GDP +1.5% q/q (f’cast +1.5%, prev +1.5%)

**December industrial output +6.9% y/y (f’cast +5.9%, prev+6.2%)

**December retail sales +8.0% y/y (f’cast +7.8%, prev+8.0%)

**Jan-December fixed asset investment +5.4% y/y (f’cast+5.2%, Jan-Nov +5.2%)

**Jan-December property investment +9.9% y/y (Jan-Nov 10.2%)

MARKET REACTION
Asian stocks rose on Friday after China released its GDP data, adding to modest early gains. The yuan firmed slightly.

COMMENTARY:
MICHELLE LAM, GREATER CHINA ECONOMIST AT SOCIETE GENERALE, HONG KONG

“It was the receding damage of the trade war that has supported the stabilization of GDP growth in Q4. In consumption, retail sales growth is also stabilizing, showing that the spending momentum is still pretty resilient despite downward pressure on labor market.

“One downside risk (to 2020 growth) is property investment (slowing). It contributed towards strong land sales in 2018 and construction activity in 2019. But a large part of that was sold in advance, whereby real estate companies do not deliver houses until two to three years later.”

MARTIN RASMUSSEN, CHINA ECONOMIST, CAPITAL ECONOMICS
“Despite the recent uptick in activity, we think it is premature to call the bottom of the current economic cycle. External headwinds should ease further in the coming quarters due to the “Phase One” trade deal and a recovery in global growth. But we think this will be offset by a renewed slowdown in domestic demand, triggering further monetary easing by the People’s Bank.”

YASUO SAKUMA, CHIEF INVESTMENT OFFICER AT LIBRA INVESTMENTS, TOKYO

“China’s GDP data was in line with expectations. Today’s data soothed some market fears since investors had developed concerns about China economy after seeing that Japan’s machine tool orders data slumped in December mainly due to weak demand from China.”

MASASHI HASHIMOTO, SENIOR CURRENCY ANALYST, MUFG BANK, TOKYO

“There were rebounds in some areas, such as fixed income investments and industrial output, which is in line with other signs that China’s deceleration is coming to an end. But we still need to see a bit more data to confirm that.

“The yuan strengthened a bit on the notable uptick in the data. We have been expecting the yuan to weaken.

“But markets seem to be reacting more positively than we have estimated to the deal, as China and the U.S. appear to have stopped slapping tariffs on each other even though it’s unclear if they can reach a Phase 2 deal. We might consider revising up our yuan forecast a bit.”

TOMMY XIE, CHINA ECONOMIST AT OCBC BANK, SINGAPORE
“The small V-shape recovery in nominal GDP reinforced our view that the Chinese economy may have stabilized in the near-term due to trade truce and more supportive policies.

“The removal of uncertainty from trade truce and China’s increasing support to high-tech manufacturing sectors will continue to lift manufacturing sectors.

“The key disappointment came from infrastructure investment, which decelerated further to 3.8% from 4% despite all the supportive measures such as green light for local government special bond as capital for infrastructure projects etc. This shows that local governments continued to face funding constraints due to a breakdown of implicit guarantee and rising default risks in China.”

MASAAKI KANNO, CHIEF ECONOMIST, SONY FINANCIAL HOLDINGS, TOKYO

“China’s GDP data was not so surprising, and basically in line with our expectations, both in terms of quarterly change and annual change. We expect China’s growth rate will (come) further down to below 6% next year.

“The Chinese economy is unlikely to fall abruptly because of ... government policies, but at the same time the trend of a further slowdown of the Chinese economy will remain unchanged.”

DANIEL GERARD, SENIOR MULTI-ASSET STRATEGIST AT STATE STREET GLOBAL MARKETS

“This is all good news and positive for the China story. We are not going to see an acceleration of growth at this point (in 2020). Managing that slowdown is what they (policymakers) worry about.

“The lower rates provided to banks have not been filtering through to the consumer and that’s something China has to get a handle on. The tricky part is that the government’s hands are a bit tied in lowering RRR much further if they want to protect against the risk to banks’ leverage ratios.”

WOEI CHEN HO, ECONOMIST, UOB, SINGAPORE
“The annual numbers are what we were expecting. Secondary industries seem to be stabilizing, but there is a bit more concern with tertiary industries. It is worrying, because that was actually driving the growth for much of 2019 ... and will be a key growth driver ahead.

“We haven’t changed our growth forecasts for a slowdown next year to 5.9%.

“That’s very much in line with structural reforms in China and diversification of companies away from China. The stabilization in U.S.-China relations is positive, but will not be able to catalyze a strong growth recovery in China as most of the tariffs are still in place.

“The central bank is looking at lowering costs for businesses, and that might continue this year at a gradual pace rather than being stepped up gradually.”

RAJIV BISWAS, ASIA PACIFIC CHIEF ECONOMIST, IHS MARKIT, SINGAPORE

“This is a good data outcome. It’s pretty much close to market expectations that growth in China was over 6% for calendar 2019, and, also, the fourth quarter (data) shows that the economy has been quite resilient.

“The strength of domestic expansion in China along with the rebound in manufacturing that we are seeing in the latest data, and also the good news on the Phase 1 trade deal, which will help to boost Chinese exports, are all positives for the Asia Pacific manufacturing supply chain to China.

“A key risk for the 2020 outlook on the domestic front would be if there was any weakness in private consumption. If we were to see signs of some loss of momentum in retail sales that would be a concern because consumption is such a strong growth engine now for the Chinese economy.”

SHUANG DING, HEAD OF CHINA ECONOMIC RESEARCH AT STANDARD CHARTERED, HONG KONG

“The most important story here is that growth did not fall below 6%. Growth in 2020 is most likely to be stabilized given the lagged impact of the previous policy and forward-looking data, including credit (total social financing) data yesterday, and the government’s emphasis on supporting the economy, including local bond issuance to support infrastructure.

“Monetary policy will still be supportive of fiscal stimulus in 2020. We expect two more RRR cuts, 50 basis points each this year … and they will also likely cut MLF moderately by 20 basis points in the first half of the year.”

LOUIS KUIJS, HEAD OF ASIA ECONOMICS AT OXFORD ECONOMICS, HONG KONG

“I think it (stabilization of growth) is sustainable. We have seen efforts (from policymakers) to make sure economy continues to grow. The risks to China are still largely on the external side. We cannot rule out things happening in Washington or the bumps in the road for the global economy.

“We still think China is in for slowdown later on, it’s in the midst of a structural slowdown. We have stabilization 2020, but after 2020 we do think there will be more structural slowdown.”

BACKGROUND:
- China’s economic growth has been slowing amid weak domestic and export demand, with pressure compounded by an escalating trade war with the United States. A government crackdown on debt and riskier types of financing in recent years have also led to a softening in investment.

- Authorities have rolled out a stream of stimulus measures including tax cuts, higher infrastructure spending and liquidity injections by the central bank, but domestic demand has been slow to respond.

- Washington and Beijing signed a Phase 1 trade deal on Jan 15, declaring a ceasefire in the trade row, but the United States will maintain most of the tariffs on Chinese imports which it imposed during the dispute.

- Economic growth is expected to slow further to 5.9% in 2020, a Reuters poll showed, reinforcing views that Beijing will need to roll out more policy support measures.

- The central bank is expected to cut banks’ reserve requirement ratios (RRR) by another 100 basis points (bps) by the end of 2020, on top of a 50 bps cut announced this month, which was the eighth since early 2018.

- China is also expected to cut its one-year loan prime rate (LPR), its new benchmark lending rate, by a total of 25 bps this year.

- Top officials have repeatedly vowed not to unleash massive “flood-like” stimulus similar to that announced in past economic downturns, which left a mountain of debt. Corporate bond defaults hit a fresh high last year, while state-linked firms rescued several troubled smaller banks.


China’s economy grew 6.4 per cent in the first quarter compared to a year earlier, the joint-slowest growth rate since quarterly growth records began to be published 27 years ago, according to official figures released on Wednesday, but beating analysts’ expectations. Photo: Reuters
Economy /  China Economy
China economy grows faster than expected in first quarter on strong industrial production
China’s economy grew 6.4 per cent in first quarter of 2019, beating analysts expectations, but matching lowest recorded quarterly growth
Fixed asset investment grew by 6.3 per cent, retail sales were up to 8.7 per cent and industrial production grew by 8.5 per cent, showing improvement in the economy

China’s economy grew 6.4 per cent in the first quarter compared to a year earlier, the joint-slowest growth rate since quarterly growth records began to be published 27 years ago, according to official figures released on Wednesday, but beating analysts’ expectations.



hina Beige Book says Wednesday that results of its third quarter survey are the weakest so far this year.
Critically, the firm finds that debt levels remain on the rise, with bond issuance climbing to its highest in the history of the survey and the ratio of so-called shadow banking to overall borrowing the second-highest on record.
Yuxian Zhang, director general and research fellow at the State Information Center's economic forecasting department, also expects the third quarter will mark a low point for China this year.
 
A Chinese national flag flies in front of a building under construction in the central business district of Beijing, China, on February 1, 2019.
Giulia Marchi | Bloomberg | Getty Images
BEIJING — China's economic numbers in the last few months have disappointed expectations but the worst is not over — analysts are expecting third quarter data to come in even weaker than before.

A quarterly survey by China Beige Book released Wednesday showed that growth slowed in the third quarter while debt levels soared.

"Nationally, revenue, profits, output, sales volumes, and job growth all slowed from a quarter ago, as did both domestic and export orders," the report said, citing China Beige Book's survey of more than 3,300 Chinese businesses.

Critically, the firm found that debt levels remain on the rise, with bond issuance climbing to its highest in the history of the survey.

The ratio of the so-called "shadow banking" to overall borrowing was also at the second-highest on record. Shadow banking refers to unregulated lending activities that are often present higher risks as they are subjected to less regulatory oversight.

High debt levels
"Borrowing is still high. This could offer some relief next quarter. Any fears of further labor market stress could result in Beijing pushing firms to staff up as credit is doled out," Shehzad Qazi, managing director of China Beige Book International said in an email. "That said, any comparison (in economic growth) with very weak Q418 will look comparatively better than it should."

Last year, China's official numbers — which are frequently doubted — showed fourth-quarter growth came in at 6.4%, dragging the annual rate to its slowest since 1990 at 6.6%.

  
Borrowing by manufacturers is so widespread that one view is: nearly every firm surveyed has borrowed this year.
China Beige Book
At the start of this year, the pace of growth held at 6.4% in the first quarter, and dropped to 6.2% in the second. China is expected to release third-quarter gross domestic product in mid-October.

Stimulus yet to be felt
Yuxian Zhang, director general at the State Information Center's economic forecasting department, also said the third quarter would mark a low point for China this year.

His reasoning is that government policies didn't really come into play in the first half of the year, and the effect of supportive measures such as tax cuts will take time to be felt, according to CNBC's translation of Zhang's Mandarin-language remarks at a press event last week.

Zhang expects gross domestic product to increase 6.1% in the third quarter and 6.2.% in the fourth, bringing the annual total to between 6.2% and 6.3%.

Percentage points aside, it's unclear how effective the Chinese government will be in its efforts to balance supporting the economy with reducing reliance on debt for growth.

VIDEO 4:12 04:12 
China is open to 'very frank discussion': Former vice minister
Squawk Box Asia
By the end of June, China had achieved more than half its goal of cutting taxes and fees by about 2 trillion yuan ($280.93 billion) this year, said Liu Shangxi, president of the Chinese Academy of Fiscal Science, a research institution under the Ministry of Finance. He was speaking earlier this month at the China Development Forum in Beijing.

However, he pointed out that the announcement and initial implementation of tax cuts was unable to keep the economic growth rate from slowing in the second quarter, partly due to external factors.

"The direction of current macroeconomic policy and the completion of the tax and fee cut policy (should focus on) increasing confidence and further stabilizing business expectations," Liu said, according to a CNBC translation of his Mandarin-language remarks.

Slowing growth
Trade tensions with the U.S., once China's largest trading partner, have significantly added to economic uncertainty in the last year. Many analysts are also quick to note that much of China's economic slowdown is due to domestic reasons, such as the government's attempt two years ago to reduce reliance on debt for growth.

Earlier this month, Premier Li Keqiang maintained the official growth target range of 6% to 6.5% while noting that it would "not be very easy" for China's economy to grow faster than 6% this year.

Given the slowing pace of economic expansion, authorities have been trying for more than a year to encourage banks to lend more to privately run enterprises. China's large, state-owned banks typically prefer to lend to companies owned by the government, rather than the private sector which actually contributes to the majority of national growth and employment.

Official figures indicate an increased pace of lending to small and micro-sized enterprises. People's Bank of China Governor Yi Gang noted at a press conference Tuesday that the balance of loans to such businesses stood at 11 trillion yuan at the end of August — an increase of 23% from a year earlier, and 8 percentage points greater than the growth rate at the end of last year.

Yi said, according to a CNBC translation of his Mandarin-language remarks, that authorities would not engage in flood-like stimulus.

"At the same time, we need to consider the long-term," he said, adding that structural adjustments were needed. He also said it was important to ensure that the effects of monetary policy were being transmitted to the economy. Other policies he outlined included lowering business financing costs, as well as promoting high-quality development of the economy.

Increased borrowing
It's less clear how much the needed financing ultimately goes toward business expansion.

"Corporate bonds do pick up so far this year, but the biggest delta still comes from short-term corporate lending including bill financing, pointing to soft credit demand," Larry Hu, chief China economist at Macquarie, said in an email.

At least for manufacturers, the China Beige Book survey found a range of worrisome responses: "Borrowing by manufacturers is so widespread that one view is nearly every firm surveyed has borrowed this year."

"The other extreme—that the same 30+% of firms are borrowing every quarter—is even more disturbing," said the report. "Either the sector as a whole is in clear distress or a large proportion of firms should be failing."

For Chinese businesses overall, the data showed the average loan term was 19 months, shorter than the prior quarter's average of 26 months. The majority of loans still had terms longer than a year, according to the data.

Central bank governor Yi and China's Finance Minister Liu Kun maintained during Tuesday's press conference that the economy remained stable and in a reasonable range. Liu pointed out that tax and fee cuts were allowing some companies to spend more on research and development, and that a daily average of 19,000 new enterprises registered with the government from January to August.



While China’s draconian measures for controlling the coronavirus have been seemingly effective, they have also inflicted serious pain on the country’s economy.

China reported today (Mar. 16) a slew of economic data that are far worse than analysts expected, building up to first-quarter GDP numbers that are expected to be awful. Overall, the data points to the world’s second-largest economy seeing its first contraction in quarterly GDP since 1989, when the country started releasing data comparable to today.

The country clocked a 20.5% decline (link in Chinese) in retail sales for January and February compared with the same period a year before, according to China’s National Bureau of Statistics. That is much worse than the median forecast of a 4% decline according to analysts surveyed by Bloomberg, as well as an 0.8% expansion expected by analysts polled by Reuters. The bureau releases retail sales figure monthly but combines them for January and February, when figures are skewed by the Lunar New Year festival, which falls in that period and usually results in a huge jump in consumption.

This year there was no such boost. The holiday, which fell in the last week of January, was preceded by China putting in place mandatory quarantines that affected millions of residents, and upended travel, movie theaters, eating out, and other consumption. Now officially a pandemic, the virus has killed over 6,500 and infected more than 169,000 people worldwide.

“The impact of the coronavirus on consumption has really started since late January. Almost the whole February saw retail sales halted. Apart from daily necessities and food, other categories of retail goods have all been impacted hugely by the epidemic,” Terry Hong, an analyst with Chinese brokerage Guotai Junan International, told Quartz. He also expects retail sales for March to continue declining, and the first half of the year to sustain “significant impact” from the virus.

Restaurants in China were hit the most, with sales contracting by 43.1% during the two months. General merchandise sales also plunged by 17.6%. Online sales, perhaps shored up somewhat by demand from a quarantined population, dropped by 3%.

Some other key indicators of China’s economy released today also look bleak. The country’s fixed-asset investment outside rural households, which mainly reflects construction activity, plunged 24.5% (link in Chinese) for January and February year-on-year.

Industrial output, an important indicator for measuring economic performance, also shrank by 13.5% (link in Chinese) for the two months, compared with a median forecast of a 3% decline from analysts polled by Bloomberg. Factory activity usually halts ahead of the holiday and then starts up again right after it. But now factories and companies have been struggling to resume work as some of their employees from worst-hit areas were banned from traveling back or have to be under self-quarantine for at least 14 days when they return.

Meanwhile, with the virus now affecting economic activity in Europe and the US as well, China is likely to see further impacts to its economy from slowing demand elsewhere. First-quarter GDP data will be out a month from now.


BEIJING • China's economy suffered through an "eye-popping" first quarter as the coronavirus outbreak hammered business activity, with deterioration even as companies were supposed to be going back to work, a private survey showed yesterday.

Chinese companies had their worst quarter on record, with every individual sector reporting worse results in the first three months of this year, according to the China Beige Book, a quarterly survey of firms.

There was widespread decline in sales, especially in the retail sector, and a simultaneous collapse in revenue and profits, according to the report, which is published by CBB International.

Economic activity collapsed in China last month as the government shut down the nation to try to stop the spread of Covid-19.

The outbreak is now sweeping the world, with others following in China's footsteps in restricting movement and work in an attempt to slow the spread of death and illness.

"A 10 per cent to 11 per cent (gross domestic product) contraction is not unreasonable" this quarter, with any recovery dependent not just on domestic resilience, but also factors beyond the government's control as China's partners shut down, according to the report.

"China may also have to admit to poor (second-quarter) numbers on global weakness. Investors may therefore be severely overestimating the extent of China's recovery and hence the extent to which China can cushion a global downturn."

There is no reason to think the household is any better off, the report said, with a contraction in employment across every sector.

The report is based on data and interviews with over 3,300 firms between Feb 13 and March 12.

Economists have repeatedly cut their forecasts for China's growth, and now see a deep contraction this quarter and the slowest expansion this year since 1976.

Even so, policymakers have expressed confidence that things in China are getting back on track and will improve in the April-June period. China is due to release first-quarter gross domestic product in the middle of next month.

The report showed the index for the workforce started contracting in the first quarter for the first time since early 2016. If that continues, it will place additional pressure on the government to act to stimulate the economy, with the official unemployment rate already at a record-high 6.2 per cent last month.



A series of newly released economic indicators show a dramatic decline in China’s economy due to the coronavirus outbreak. The collapse in industrial production, retail sales and fixed-asset investment was much more serious than analysts had expected. The data, released Monday, can serve as a warning to other countries as to the coronavirus’ toll on the economy.

Industrial production, a gauge of manufacturing, mining and utilities activity, dropped 13.5% in January and February compared with the same period last year. The indicator fell for the first time since records began, in July 1998. 

The decline is fueling concerns that China's economy will contract in the first quarter – the first such contraction since the end of the Cultural Revolution, in 1976.

The data come after weeks of factories and businesses being shuttered and people living mostly isolated in their homes, a scenario that is starting to be replicated in Europe and North America. In late January, the Chinese government took the first measures to shut down transportation links. Authorities later put entire cities under quarantine in Hubei province, where the coronavirus originated, and elsewhere in the country.

The isolation hit retail sales, which collapsed 20.5% in the first two months of the year. Analysts polled by Bloomberg had expected only a 4% drop.

Today In: Manufacturing 
Inside A Silicon Valley Unicorn’s Urgent Dash To 3D-Print Face Shields And Test Swabs To Battle COVID-19
What Technology And Manufacturing Can Do To Help Against COVID-19
As The Virus Changes, So Will Our Enterprise Technology Footprint
Similarly, fixed-asset investment, which measures expenditures on things like infrastructure and property, plummeted 24.5% - the indicator’s first contraction on record. Analysts had expected only a 2% decrease. 

“The coronavirus is the simple explanation to these unprecedented drops in core economic indicators,” says Rory Green, an economist focused on China at the London-based consultancy TS Lombard. Green posits that the predictions missed the mark for three reasons: first, because China had started in January to show signs of building economic momentum; secondly, because the nationwide lockdown partly coincided with the Lunar New Year holiday, when businesses would have been closed anyway; and thirdly, because there were doubts Beijing would allow such negative numbers to be published. 

“The bottom has definitely been reached,” Green says. “The question now is the speed and strength of the recovery.”

Factories have started to reopen gradually across China’s provinces. In many cases, the return to work has happened in stages. Sun Huimin, president of Jiangyin Donglian High-Pressure Pipe Fitting in eastern Jiangsu province, says local workers were the first to return to his factory, while many of the employees who had traveled to other provinces during the Lunar New Year had returned but were still in isolation in their homes. Sun says he expects production and orders to pick up by April or May.

People’s isolation will continue to affect both industrial production and consumption for the near future, says independent economic analyst Ye Tan. “The rate of work resumption is indeed beginning to rise, and we know that the amount of electricity and power generation has also started to rise, but it will take a while to fully resume production,” she says.

Ye says she expects the government to stimulate consumption and boost investment “in new and old infrastructure … on a large scale.”

The flip side of a large government stimulus is that it’s going to weaken China down the road, Green says, making the economy less efficient and less sustainable.

Meanwhile, analysts say March will be a decisive month in terms of whether an economic recovery can be expected in the first quarter.