BEIJING

China’s top annual economic policy gathering, the Central Economic Work Conference (中央经济工作会议, Zhongyang jingji gongzuo huiyi), or CEWC, was held between December 10 and 12 in Beijing. This year’s CEWC focused on the theme of “achieving developmental progress on the basis of first ensuring stability” (稳字当头, 稳中求进 / wen zi dangtou, wen zhong qiu jin) (Xinhua, December 12)—thereby continuing a theme stressed during the meeting of the National People’s Congress in March of this year (China Brief, March 22). Given increasing economic risks and political challenges, both domestic and international, the party-state’s focus on the supremacy of stability is unsurprising. Importantly, the CEWC reiterates that the goal of achieving a “moderately prosperous society” (小康社会, xiaokang shehui) by the end of 2020 is “a priority among priorities” (重中之重, zhong zhong zhi zhong).

This article examines the key outcomes of the 2019 CEWC, which set the overall direction of China’s economic policy agenda for 2020. In doing so, we highlight a central underlying tension: on the one hand, the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) wants to keep a steady ship at a time of economic and strategic flux; on the other, maintaining strong economic growth requires ambitious developmental goals and economic reform imperatives, which have added pressure for bold policy actions. How well Chinese policymakers can navigate this tension in 2020 has important ramifications for both China’s national development and the CCP’s political legitimacy.

The Ritual of the “Three-Step” Dance

Started in 1994, the annual CEWC is China’s most authoritative economic policy conference. It is usually attended by all members of the Politburo Standing Committee, as well as virtually all party-state actors with economic responsibilities—including central and provincial party and state organs, the military, and state-owned enterprises. This year’s conference was no exception. The conference serves three functions: to evaluate the economic policy work of the current year; to analyze and present the CCP Central Committee’s view on the current economic situation facing China; and to plan economic policy work, including macroeconomic policy and key economic development tasks, for the following year (Xinhua, December 20, 2017).

As per past patterns, this year’s conference was held close to the end of the year, and like previous years it was preceded by two other annual economic policy work meetings. The first was the annual CCP Central Committee-hosted forum (held on December 4) seeking “comments” and “suggestions” on economic policy from select representatives from outside the CCP (党外人士, danwai renshi) (Xinhua, December 6). These non-CCP groups and individuals are all closely vetted, and most are effectively controlled or co-opted by the CCP United Front Work Department. They include the eight minor non-communist parties (民主党派, minzhu dangpai), the All-China Federation of Industry and Commerce (全国工商联, Quanguo Gongshang Lian), and non-party aligned personalities (无党派人士, wu dangpai renshi). This meeting is a forum for political ritual and theater, rather than genuine policy consultation.

The second event was the Politburo meeting (held on December 6) that provided high-level guidance and set the tone for the CEWC that occurred a few days later (Xinhua, December 6). Like in 2018, this year’s Politburo meeting preceding the CEWC also provided direction for the next year’s party discipline, integrity and anti-corruption work (Xinhua, December 6; Xinhua, December 13, 2018).

Stability and Managing Risk

Economists have long expected that China’s rapid economic growth will eventually taper off. Since Chinese economic reform started in 1979, GDP growth has averaged almost 10 percent per year (World Bank, December 13). In the last decade, growth has moderated. Indeed, the slowdown is perhaps faster than expected—there are doubts whether China can reach its target growth of between 6 and 6.5 percent in 2019 (Reuters, November 22). While the CEWC did not specify economic growth targets for 2020, it did state the need to “ensure a reasonable economic growth and steady improvement in [growth] quality” (Xinhua, December 12). This “reasonable” rate is likely to be around 6 percent (People’s Daily, December 13).

In the long term, demography is one of the most serious challenges to China’s continued economic rise. Beijing is clearly concerned about its economic implications. The relaxation of the “one-child policy” to the “two-child policy” (二孩政策, Erhai zhengce), as well as the social campaigns to stigmatize late marriages for women, are examples of government responses (Xinhua, December 27, 2015). Yet social policies to address this demographic challenge—such as delaying retirement age—can negatively affect the career prospects of the incoming workforce, potentially adding to existing resentments in the labor market.

While the CEWC did not address the economy-related demography challenges, it did focus in on three categories of risks: financial, environmental, and external. Financial scandals and environmental degradation have proved to be potentially destabilising forces. Public protests have erupted due to investors falling victim to dodgy financial schemes, or environmental concerns such as water contamination. Given the theme of stability, it is no surprise that the CEWC repeatedly drew attention to financial and environmental risks. Wealth inequality and labor issues, which were not directly addressed by the CEWC, are also sources of destabilizing discontent. On external risks, the headline-grabbing trade conflict with the United States did not get an explicit mention, apart from the rather vague “sources of global turbulence and risks” (Xinhua, December 12). Instead, the focus was on the slowing of global growth, which in turn likely means a reduction in the demand for Chinese exports.

Reform and Work Priorities

This year’s CEWC identified six areas of priority for China’s 2020 economic policy agenda:

Promoting the “New Development Concept” (新发展理念, Xin fazhan linian), characterized by innovative, balanced, and high quality development.
Fighting the “three major battles” against poverty, pollution and financial instability.
Guaranteeing the livelihood of people, especially those in poverty. This covers quality of jobs, adequate pensions for the old, and housing price stability.
Proactive fiscal policy and prudent monetary policy. This includes the cost of financing, especially for small-and-medium enterprises (SMEs), and guiding investments towards areas such as advanced manufacturing and infrastructure.
High quality development and improving overall competitiveness through innovation and reform. This covers issues such as the commercialization of research, state-owned enterprise (SOE) innovation, strategic industry policy, business operating costs, “zombie firms”, the digital economy, care for the elderly, infrastructure, telecommunications, and disaster resilience.
Economic system reform to accelerate the development of a high-standard market system. This includes reforms for SOEs, the intellectual property regime, the tax system, and the financial system; protections for foreign investment; and active participation in global economic governance and WTO reform.
The priorities identified are comprehensive, covering a wide spectrum of economic issues. An emphasis on “quality” and “balance” in economic development is evident. On the one hand, Beijing wants the economy to continue to grow at a reasonably fast pace. This is necessary as economic growth and improved living standards are important for legitimizing the Party’s monopoly on political power. On the other hand, further sustainable growth requires further reform, which affects the material interests of a multitude of party, state, and military actors, and hampers the Party’s ability to distribute economic rents to its favored clients.

Beijing sees innovation as a way of addressing structural constraints on the economy. China is catching up with advanced economies across a range of industries—in some it is already leading the world. This means that further growth in those industries can only be achieved with innovation and better technology. Promoting innovation is a theme running throughout the six priority areas, and there is a sense that Beijing sees innovation as a panacea for achieving sustainable growth while not giving up levers of state control.

Technology transfer and diffusion has been a sticking point between China and advanced economies. This is unlikely to change for the foreseeable future, even if China further strengthens intellectual property protection. An increasing number of countries and companies are grappling with rising geopolitical tension; national security concerns over the use of Chinese technology products; the relationship between the party-state and Chinese companies; and concerns over dual-use technology.

Looking outwards, China will attempt to exert more influence on global economic governance, including with respect to the WTO reform process. This will again pit China against developed economies, including the United States, the European Union, and Japan. These three economies have very different ideas from China as to what reforms are needed to maintain the efficacy of the WTO. However, China may find allies for its reform proposals among developing economies, including among the other “BRICS” (Brazil, Russia, India, China, South Africa) countries.

Conclusion

Stability is the key theme of China’s economic policy direction for next year. In fact, the Mandarin Chinese word for “stability” (稳, wen) appeared a staggering 29 times in the official Xinhua report on this year’s CEWC (Xinhua, December 12). Given the rising economic challenges domestically and an expected turbulent global environment next year, stability is necessary to ensure Party legitimacy and to avoid political unrest stemming from economic troubles. The Party will surely celebrate achieving a “moderately prosperous society” at the end of 2020 to remind the Chinese people of its role in poverty alleviation and improving living standards.

Balancing sustained economic growth with increased financial and environmental risks will not be easy. Beijing is putting its faith in its New Development Concept centered around “quality growth”. However, given the severe economic challenges that it faces, Beijing may redouble its efforts to push an “ethnonationalist” ideology for legitimization. In the international community, China’s focus on innovation and its efforts aimed at increasing influence over global economic governance institutions may find support among some developing economies; however, it will likely lead to more friction with developed economies, including the United States, the European Union, and Japan.

Yun Jiang is the Co-Editor of China Neican, a policy newsletter on China issues. Prior to this, she worked for the Australian Government. Her research interests include geoeconomics, economic statecraft, and Australia-China relations.

Adam Ni is the Co-Editor of China Neican, a policy newsletter on China issues. His focus includes China’s international relations, strategy and security issues. Previously, he worked for the Australian Government, and at the Australian Centre on China in the World.



First up, China recorded its fewest births in 58 years in 2019, with them down to +14.7 mln, and lower by -580,000 than in the previous year according to official data. Their population has just nudged 1.4 bln people, a rise of just +0.3% in 2019. Their working aged population is 64% of the total and that is very similar to the New Zealand makeup.

China also reported that its economy grew +6.1% in 2019 ending the year with Q4 growth slightly lower at +6.0% which was the same expansion at Q3. A slew of other December data was released at the same time showing industrial production was up at the rate of +6.9% in December and that was the second highest month in 2019. In contrast, coal and oil production hardly rose at all, but electricity generation was up +3.5%. (Many see this electricity growth data as a better reflection of actual economic activity.) Fixed asset investment - another key economic marker - rose +5.4% in December. Retail sales were up +8.0% in December compared with the same month in 2018.

Fast economic growth and no population growth will mean China is making quick gains in per capita income levels. And while the percentage growth gains may be slowing, the absolute gains are holding.

And China reduced its one year prime lending rate by -10 bps to 4.05% over the weekend. It reduced its five year prime rate to 4.70%. Both were -5 bps lower than the market was expecting. It might be reducing lending rates, but it definitely not allowing any movement on term deposit rates which are stuck at 1.50% for one year and 2.75% for three years - as they have been since 2015.

Balancing the generally positive Chinese data however have been generally weaker American announcements.

Updated data from the US shows that China is letting its investment in US Treasury bonds atrophy. For each of the past six months, Japan has been the largest holder, and the Chinese holding has fallen by -US$32 bln or -2.9%. At this rate, Chinese holdings will fall below US$1 tln some time next year.

Housing starts in the US took off in December, up +40% from the same month a year ago, which admittedly was unusually weak. But it may be a short-lived boost - building permits for residential construction are starting to tail off from recent rises although they are still +6% higher than a year ago.

American industrial production wasn't so flash however, coming in a full -1% lower in December 2019 than December 2018. There are many sectors with large declines, and without gains in IT and especially defense spending, their manufacturing sector would have been in a crisis situation.

Job openings are shrinking, and actually shrinking fast. They fell more than -7% in November from October, and are down -11% in a year.

Despite that, consumer sentiment remained virtually unchanged in early January, differing by just -0.2 Index-points from December.
On Friday we reported that the Atlanta Fed's GDPNow calculation has economic growth shrinking to just +1.8% pa for Q4-2019, a fast retreat. Today we can reveal that similar tracking by the NY Fed has it even lower at +1.2% pa.

One of the most interesting data comparisons is between the real dollar GDP growth between China and the USA. Based on the official data released by each country, the American annual rise in 2019 was +US$388 bln, a remarkable -32% less than the +US$569 bln rise in 2018. That compares with the real 'dollar' rise for China in 2019 which was almost exactly the same level in 2019 as in 2018 - or a bit over +US$800 bln in each of the past two years. History will record that the tariff wars hurt the Americans much more than the Chinese. Washington is blind to this failure, as much as Beijing is blind to the unsustainability of their current policy direction. But at the moment, China is definitely winning a bigger expansion of their economy than the Americans.

The Australian bush fire news is seriously undermining their tourism industry. An internal survey conducted among its 850 members of the country's peak export tourism body showed that 70% of them were seeing a lot of cancellations from their big key markets – America, Britain and China. They estimate the cost is -NZ$5 bln already and things are likely to worsen from here.

The UST 10yr yield is exactly where it was at this time last week at just under 1.83%. Their 2-10 curve has moved little, now at +26 bps. Their 1-5 curve is flatter at just +6 bps. And their 3m-10yr curve is also little-changed at +29 bps. The Aussie Govt 10yr is at 1.18% and very similar to where it was a week ago. The China Govt 10yr is marginally lower at 3.13%. And the NZ Govt 10 yr is up +6 bps for the week at 1.55%.

Gold is now at US$1,557/oz and almost exactly the same level as a week ago.

US oil prices are also little changed, now just on US$58.50/bbl and the Brent benchmark is just over US$64.50/bbl.

The Kiwi dollar is now at 66.1 USc and a broadly similar level to this time last week. On the cross rates we are at 96.1 AUc. Against the euro we are at 59.6 euro cents. That puts our TWI-5 at 71.4 and almost the same level it was this time last week.

Bitcoin is down -3% from where we left it on Saturday to US$8,624 although it is up +6% from this time last week, and up almost +20% since the start of the year. The bitcoin rate is charted in the exchange rate set below.




hina's economy grew 6.1 percent in 2019, according to official figures. The number is in tandem with the target range of 6.0 to 6.5 percent projected early last year.

The reading from the National Bureau of Statistics (NBS) was lower than the 6.6 percent gain registered in 2018 and came in as the slowest pace since 1990. But it is still one of the fastest rates of economic growth around the world in a lackluster global economical environment dragged down by wild cards of geopolitical tensions and tit-for-tat tariffs.
Bright spots in Chinese economy

China's per capita gross domestic product (GDP) in the past year stood at 70,892 yuan or 10,276 U.S. dollars, breaking through the 10,000 U.S. dollar mark for the first time in history and achieving a new leap, according to Ning Jizhe, head of the NBS.

GDP carried on its upward trend and came to a climax of 99.09 trillion yuan (14.38 trillion U.S. dollars) in 2019, with the service sector accounting for more than half of the total. Fourth-quarter GDP growth settled at 6.0 percent, in line with expectations and steady from the pace in the third quarter, NBS data showed.

The world's second-largest economy has pledged to attach more importance to the quality of development, embracing a healthier economy structure, and a preferable business environment, instead of just putting economic growth under the limelight.

China's foreign trade edged down one percent for all of 2019 to settle at an all-time high of 4.6 trillion U.S. dollars, with exports climbing 0.5 percent and imports, contracting 2.8 percent. This resulted in a trade surplus of 421.5 billion U.S. dollars, 25.4 percent higher from a year earlier, the third highest since 1950, 2015, and 2016.

Other data in recent weeks showed exports increasing 7.6 percent from a year earlier to stay at 237.7 billion U.S. dollars in December 2019, ending four straight months of contraction. Imports in the interim skyrocketed 16.3 percent year on year to end up with 190.9 billion U.S. dollars, the second monthly consecutive build-up after six straight months of drop.

The value-added industrial output went up 5.7 percent year on year in 2019, slowing from the 6.2 percent growth registered in 2018.

Consumption remained the overriding growth engine fueling the country's economy, with retail sales, a major indicator of consumption growth, rising 8 percent compared to the same period last year.

Friday's batch of official Chinese economic data also showed property investment rose 9.9 percent in 2019 from a year earlier. Fixed-asset investment notched up a gain of 5.4 percent for the full year, versus expectations for a 5.2 percent gain, the same as in the first 11 months of the year. 

Economic package works 

Even before drawn-out and bruising trade tensions with the U.S., China still made it to manage a slowdown in its economy over the past year via a raft of economic stimulus and ample ability to institute new support, together with other policy tweaks such as tax cuts and infrastructure spending. 

China's policymakers rolled out a raft of policies last year to shore up the economy weakened by looming global uncertainties and reduce the risk of massive job shedding via tax and fee cuts. That concrete figure, according to the Ministry of Industry and Information Technology (MIIT), is to settle at 2.36 trillion yuan (about 340.73 billion U.S. dollars). 

Tax cuts for the manufacturing sector and ancillary industries comprised nearly 70 percent of the annual value-added tax reduction, coupled with inclusive tax reduction for small and micro enterprises to the tune of 250 billion yuan.

Realizing that China's development faced a more complicated and difficult external environment didn't rattle Chinese officials, who ratcheted up their efforts to push forward high-level opening up and shortened the negative list that outlines sectors off-limits to foreign investors.  

To free up more funds for lending and back up the real economy, the central bank had cut the cash that banks have to hold as reserves three times over the past year and guided borrowing costs lower. On the first day of 2020, China decided to cut the reserve requirement ratio (RRR) for financial institutions by 50 basis points from January 6, releasing about 800 billion yuan (114.6 billion U.S. dollars) of long-term liquidity for social financing. 

The growth story is far from over 

The World Bank forecast that China's economic growth will settle at 5.9 percent in 2020, while growth among advanced economies including the United States, the euro area and Japan is projected to undergo a drop to 1.4 percent in 2020 from 1.6 percent in 2019, circumscribed by softness in manufacturing and the lingering negative effects of U.S. tariffs. 

Washington-based International Monetary Fund predicted last October that China's GDP will grow at a rate of 5.8 percent in 2020 and downgraded its 2020 forecast for the "precarious" global economy to 3.4 percent. 

"You won't expect any of the economies, whatever the size, to grow continuously at 10 percent or seven percent or eight percent ... So, I think, we are talking about growth with better quality, higher sustainability. 5.8 percent, or any number in that neighborhood, I think is reasonable," according to Zhang Tao, IMF's Deputy Managing Director.  

The expert explained that China is restructuring its economy to expand more sustainably, relying less on debt and more on domestic consumption to fuel growth, which would translate in slower but better-quality growth.

Although some of the issues being mooted in the trade relationship are still on the table, a topsy-turvy 2019 led to a phase one deal at length -- China and the U.S. sealed a hard-fought agreement on Wednesday to halt their protracted trade war, which is hailed by the U.S. Chamber of Commerce as "very positive development." 

Some U.S. companies are still pressing ahead with their business plans in China while waning market sentiments is enveloped in dark clouds. Delta Air Lines is one of the several major American carriers operating in the country. Although the current trade spat has taken a toll on some of its routes -- at least in the short term -- it is still bringing new aircraft into operation and upgrading services, signaling confidence for the future. 

Wong Hong, president of Greater China and Singapore region of Delta Air Lines, said, "As China spells lots of potential, we believe that China can offer. Despite the current market conditions, we see this rising middle class as a real force as far as the demand is concerned. In the long term, we believe we need to be able to capture and serve this customer well." 



China’s economy grew 6.4 per cent in the first quarter compared to a year earlier, the joint-slowest growth rate since quarterly growth records began to be published 27 years ago, according to official figures released on Wednesday, but beating analysts’ expectations.
This beat the median forecast of a Bloomberg survey of economists, which predicted gross domestic product (GDP) growth would slow to 6.3 per cent for the quarter.
However, it falls within the government’s growth target range of between 6.0 and 6.5 per cent for this year. Last year the economy grew at 6.6 per cent.
GDP growth matches the fourth quarter growth figure of 6.4 per cent, which matched the lowest growth rate since the Chinese government began publishing quarterly growth rates at the beginning of 1992.
The Chinese economy is battling a number of serious headwinds, including a long-running trade war with the United States, weak consumption at home and slower export demand abroad, as well as debt problems in both the public and private sectors.
Also released on Wednesday, fixed asset investment, which measures spending on physical assets such as real estate, infrastructure or machinery. In more welcome news to Beijing policymakers, it continued its upwards trend, growing at 6.3 per cent year-on-year in the January-March period, up from 6.1 per cent in January and February.
This was in line with the Bloomberg poll of analysts, which had predicted a 6.3 per cent rise.
This figure was telegraphed by strong sales of industrial machinery, such as excavators and mobile cranes, which have been growing strongly this year on the back of significant stimulus measures enacted by Beijing, which has been partly funding infrastructure projects around China.
Industrial production, a measure of the output of the industrial sectors in China’s economy, including manufacturing, mining and utilities, grew by 8.5 per cent in March from a year earlier.
This was much higher than a Bloomberg poll of analysts, which had forecast 5.9 per cent growth and is up from the 5.3 per cent year-on-year growth for January and February, when the data was combined to counter the distortions created by the Lunar New Year holiday. The January-February growth rate was the lowest reading since 2002.
Retail sales, a measure of consumer demand in China, grew by 8.7 per cent in March from a year earlier. This was higher than the expected figure of 8.4 per cent.
It was also better than January-February’s combined performance, when it grew 8.2 per cent.
The numbers suggest that Beijing’s stimulus measures are starting to boost the Chinese economy, as intended. It has been estimated that stimulus, through expansionary monetary policy, tax cuts and infrastructure spending, could be as high as 4.25 per cent of GDP this year.
Earlier in April, International Monetary Fund pointed to the stimulus measures when it upgraded its growth forecast for China’s economy for 2019. The fund now forecast the economy will grow by 6.3 per cent for the year, 0.1 percentage point higher than it previously predicted.
However, this week China was warned by the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) that too much stimulus and not enough deleveraging could lead to serious economic imbalances in the future. The Paris-based OECD urged Beijing to stay on its course of reducing bad debt and risky lending from the economy, which was a focus throughout 2018 but which has largely been placed on hold due to the economic slowdown.
The US-China trade war, meanwhile, has acted as a net drag on the economy over the past 10 months. Exports showed some sign of recovery in March, rising 14.2 per cent growth from a year earlier. However imports fell by 7.6 per cent, suggesting continued weak domestic demand.
Experts have long warned that the real impact of the trade war will be on economic sentiment, with uncertainty reducing business investment and consumer spending. Beijing has been attempting to counter weaker sentiment in China with its substantial stimulus programme.



(Reuters) - China’s economy grew 6.0% in the fourth quarter of 2019 from a year earlier, official data showed on Friday, in line with expectations and steadying from the previous quarter’s pace.

The growth rate continued to hover at the weakest in nearly three decades.

The world’s second-largest economy grew an annual 6.1% in 2019, the slowest in 29 years, but still within the government’s target of 6-6.5%. Analysts had expected it to expand 6.1% in 2019, down from 6.6% in 2018.

Facing sluggish demand at home and abroad and escalating U.S. trade pressure, Chinese policymakers have been rolling out a stream of growth boosting measures over the past two years, while trying to contain financial and debt risks.

KEY POINTS
**Q4 GDP +6.0% y/y (f’cast +6.0%, 2018 +6.0%)

**Q4 GDP +1.5% q/q (f’cast +1.5%, prev +1.5%)

**December industrial output +6.9% y/y (f’cast +5.9%, prev+6.2%)

**December retail sales +8.0% y/y (f’cast +7.8%, prev+8.0%)

**Jan-December fixed asset investment +5.4% y/y (f’cast+5.2%, Jan-Nov +5.2%)

**Jan-December property investment +9.9% y/y (Jan-Nov 10.2%)

MARKET REACTION
Asian stocks rose on Friday after China released its GDP data, adding to modest early gains. The yuan firmed slightly.

COMMENTARY:
MICHELLE LAM, GREATER CHINA ECONOMIST AT SOCIETE GENERALE, HONG KONG

“It was the receding damage of the trade war that has supported the stabilization of GDP growth in Q4. In consumption, retail sales growth is also stabilizing, showing that the spending momentum is still pretty resilient despite downward pressure on labor market.

“One downside risk (to 2020 growth) is property investment (slowing). It contributed towards strong land sales in 2018 and construction activity in 2019. But a large part of that was sold in advance, whereby real estate companies do not deliver houses until two to three years later.”

MARTIN RASMUSSEN, CHINA ECONOMIST, CAPITAL ECONOMICS
“Despite the recent uptick in activity, we think it is premature to call the bottom of the current economic cycle. External headwinds should ease further in the coming quarters due to the “Phase One” trade deal and a recovery in global growth. But we think this will be offset by a renewed slowdown in domestic demand, triggering further monetary easing by the People’s Bank.”

YASUO SAKUMA, CHIEF INVESTMENT OFFICER AT LIBRA INVESTMENTS, TOKYO

“China’s GDP data was in line with expectations. Today’s data soothed some market fears since investors had developed concerns about China economy after seeing that Japan’s machine tool orders data slumped in December mainly due to weak demand from China.”

MASASHI HASHIMOTO, SENIOR CURRENCY ANALYST, MUFG BANK, TOKYO

“There were rebounds in some areas, such as fixed income investments and industrial output, which is in line with other signs that China’s deceleration is coming to an end. But we still need to see a bit more data to confirm that.

“The yuan strengthened a bit on the notable uptick in the data. We have been expecting the yuan to weaken.

“But markets seem to be reacting more positively than we have estimated to the deal, as China and the U.S. appear to have stopped slapping tariffs on each other even though it’s unclear if they can reach a Phase 2 deal. We might consider revising up our yuan forecast a bit.”

TOMMY XIE, CHINA ECONOMIST AT OCBC BANK, SINGAPORE
“The small V-shape recovery in nominal GDP reinforced our view that the Chinese economy may have stabilized in the near-term due to trade truce and more supportive policies.

“The removal of uncertainty from trade truce and China’s increasing support to high-tech manufacturing sectors will continue to lift manufacturing sectors.

“The key disappointment came from infrastructure investment, which decelerated further to 3.8% from 4% despite all the supportive measures such as green light for local government special bond as capital for infrastructure projects etc. This shows that local governments continued to face funding constraints due to a breakdown of implicit guarantee and rising default risks in China.”

MASAAKI KANNO, CHIEF ECONOMIST, SONY FINANCIAL HOLDINGS, TOKYO

“China’s GDP data was not so surprising, and basically in line with our expectations, both in terms of quarterly change and annual change. We expect China’s growth rate will (come) further down to below 6% next year.

“The Chinese economy is unlikely to fall abruptly because of ... government policies, but at the same time the trend of a further slowdown of the Chinese economy will remain unchanged.”

DANIEL GERARD, SENIOR MULTI-ASSET STRATEGIST AT STATE STREET GLOBAL MARKETS

“This is all good news and positive for the China story. We are not going to see an acceleration of growth at this point (in 2020). Managing that slowdown is what they (policymakers) worry about.

“The lower rates provided to banks have not been filtering through to the consumer and that’s something China has to get a handle on. The tricky part is that the government’s hands are a bit tied in lowering RRR much further if they want to protect against the risk to banks’ leverage ratios.”
WOEI CHEN HO, ECONOMIST, UOB, SINGAPORE
“The annual numbers are what we were expecting. Secondary industries seem to be stabilizing, but there is a bit more concern with tertiary industries. It is worrying, because that was actually driving the growth for much of 2019 ... and will be a key growth driver ahead.

“We haven’t changed our growth forecasts for a slowdown next year to 5.9%.

“That’s very much in line with structural reforms in China and diversification of companies away from China. The stabilization in U.S.-China relations is positive, but will not be able to catalyze a strong growth recovery in China as most of the tariffs are still in place.

“The central bank is looking at lowering costs for businesses, and that might continue this year at a gradual pace rather than being stepped up gradually.”

RAJIV BISWAS, ASIA PACIFIC CHIEF ECONOMIST, IHS MARKIT, SINGAPORE

“This is a good data outcome. It’s pretty much close to market expectations that growth in China was over 6% for calendar 2019, and, also, the fourth quarter (data) shows that the economy has been quite resilient.

“The strength of domestic expansion in China along with the rebound in manufacturing that we are seeing in the latest data, and also the good news on the Phase 1 trade deal, which will help to boost Chinese exports, are all positives for the Asia Pacific manufacturing supply chain to China.

“A key risk for the 2020 outlook on the domestic front would be if there was any weakness in private consumption. If we were to see signs of some loss of momentum in retail sales that would be a concern because consumption is such a strong growth engine now for the Chinese economy.”

SHUANG DING, HEAD OF CHINA ECONOMIC RESEARCH AT STANDARD CHARTERED, HONG KONG

“The most important story here is that growth did not fall below 6%. Growth in 2020 is most likely to be stabilized given the lagged impact of the previous policy and forward-looking data, including credit (total social financing) data yesterday, and the government’s emphasis on supporting the economy, including local bond issuance to support infrastructure.

“Monetary policy will still be supportive of fiscal stimulus in 2020. We expect two more RRR cuts, 50 basis points each this year … and they will also likely cut MLF moderately by 20 basis points in the first half of the year.”

LOUIS KUIJS, HEAD OF ASIA ECONOMICS AT OXFORD ECONOMICS, HONG KONG

“I think it (stabilization of growth) is sustainable. We have seen efforts (from policymakers) to make sure economy continues to grow. The risks to China are still largely on the external side. We cannot rule out things happening in Washington or the bumps in the road for the global economy.

“We still think China is in for slowdown later on, it’s in the midst of a structural slowdown. We have stabilization 2020, but after 2020 we do think there will be more structural slowdown.”

BACKGROUND:
- China’s economic growth has been slowing amid weak domestic and export demand, with pressure compounded by an escalating trade war with the United States. A government crackdown on debt and riskier types of financing in recent years have also led to a softening in investment.

- Authorities have rolled out a stream of stimulus measures including tax cuts, higher infrastructure spending and liquidity injections by the central bank, but domestic demand has been slow to respond.

- Washington and Beijing signed a Phase 1 trade deal on Jan 15, declaring a ceasefire in the trade row, but the United States will maintain most of the tariffs on Chinese imports which it imposed during the dispute.

- Economic growth is expected to slow further to 5.9% in 2020, a Reuters poll showed, reinforcing views that Beijing will need to roll out more policy support measures.

- The central bank is expected to cut banks’ reserve requirement ratios (RRR) by another 100 basis points (bps) by the end of 2020, on top of a 50 bps cut announced this month, which was the eighth since early 2018.

- China is also expected to cut its one-year loan prime rate (LPR), its new benchmark lending rate, by a total of 25 bps this year.

- Top officials have repeatedly vowed not to unleash massive “flood-like” stimulus similar to that announced in past economic downturns, which left a mountain of debt. Corporate bond defaults hit a fresh high last year, while state-linked firms rescued several troubled smaller banks.



While China’s draconian measures for controlling the coronavirus have been seemingly effective, they have also inflicted serious pain on the country’s economy.

China reported today (Mar. 16) a slew of economic data that are far worse than analysts expected, building up to first-quarter GDP numbers that are expected to be awful. Overall, the data points to the world’s second-largest economy seeing its first contraction in quarterly GDP since 1989, when the country started releasing data comparable to today.
The country clocked a 20.5% decline (link in Chinese) in retail sales for January and February compared with the same period a year before, according to China’s National Bureau of Statistics. That is much worse than the median forecast of a 4% decline according to analysts surveyed by Bloomberg, as well as an 0.8% expansion expected by analysts polled by Reuters. The bureau releases retail sales figure monthly but combines them for January and February, when figures are skewed by the Lunar New Year festival, which falls in that period and usually results in a huge jump in consumption.

This year there was no such boost. The holiday, which fell in the last week of January, was preceded by China putting in place mandatory quarantines that affected millions of residents, and upended travel, movie theaters, eating out, and other consumption. Now officially a pandemic, the virus has killed over 6,500 and infected more than 169,000 people worldwide.

“The impact of the coronavirus on consumption has really started since late January. Almost the whole February saw retail sales halted. Apart from daily necessities and food, other categories of retail goods have all been impacted hugely by the epidemic,” Terry Hong, an analyst with Chinese brokerage Guotai Junan International, told Quartz. He also expects retail sales for March to continue declining, and the first half of the year to sustain “significant impact” from the virus.

Restaurants in China were hit the most, with sales contracting by 43.1% during the two months. General merchandise sales also plunged by 17.6%. Online sales, perhaps shored up somewhat by demand from a quarantined population, dropped by 3%.

Some other key indicators of China’s economy released today also look bleak. The country’s fixed-asset investment outside rural households, which mainly reflects construction activity, plunged 24.5% (link in Chinese) for January and February year-on-year.

Industrial output, an important indicator for measuring economic performance, also shrank by 13.5% (link in Chinese) for the two months, compared with a median forecast of a 3% decline from analysts polled by Bloomberg. Factory activity usually halts ahead of the holiday and then starts up again right after it. But now factories and companies have been struggling to resume work as some of their employees from worst-hit areas were banned from traveling back or have to be under self-quarantine for at least 14 days when they return.

Meanwhile, with the virus now affecting economic activity in Europe and the US as well, China is likely to see further impacts to its economy from slowing demand elsewhere. First-quarter GDP data will be out a month from now.



BEIJING • China's economy suffered through an "eye-popping" first quarter as the coronavirus outbreak hammered business activity, with deterioration even as companies were supposed to be going back to work, a private survey showed yesterday.

Chinese companies had their worst quarter on record, with every individual sector reporting worse results in the first three months of this year, according to the China Beige Book, a quarterly survey of firms.

There was widespread decline in sales, especially in the retail sector, and a simultaneous collapse in revenue and profits, according to the report, which is published by CBB International.
Economic activity collapsed in China last month as the government shut down the nation to try to stop the spread of Covid-19.

The outbreak is now sweeping the world, with others following in China's footsteps in restricting movement and work in an attempt to slow the spread of death and illness.

"A 10 per cent to 11 per cent (gross domestic product) contraction is not unreasonable" this quarter, with any recovery dependent not just on domestic resilience, but also factors beyond the government's control as China's partners shut down, according to the report.

"China may also have to admit to poor (second-quarter) numbers on global weakness. Investors may therefore be severely overestimating the extent of China's recovery and hence the extent to which China can cushion a global downturn."
There is no reason to think the household is any better off, the report said, with a contraction in employment across every sector.

The report is based on data and interviews with over 3,300 firms between Feb 13 and March 12.

Economists have repeatedly cut their forecasts for China's growth, and now see a deep contraction this quarter and the slowest expansion this year since 1976.

Even so, policymakers have expressed confidence that things in China are getting back on track and will improve in the April-June period. China is due to release first-quarter gross domestic product in the middle of next month.

The report showed the index for the workforce started contracting in the first quarter for the first time since early 2016. If that continues, it will place additional pressure on the government to act to stimulate the economy, with the official unemployment rate already at a record-high 6.2 per cent last month.



A series of newly released economic indicators show a dramatic decline in China’s economy due to the coronavirus outbreak. The collapse in industrial production, retail sales and fixed-asset investment was much more serious than analysts had expected. The data, released Monday, can serve as a warning to other countries as to the coronavirus’ toll on the economy.

Industrial production, a gauge of manufacturing, mining and utilities activity, dropped 13.5% in January and February compared with the same period last year. The indicator fell for the first time since records began, in July 1998. 

The decline is fueling concerns that China's economy will contract in the first quarter – the first such contraction since the end of the Cultural Revolution, in 1976.

The data come after weeks of factories and businesses being shuttered and people living mostly isolated in their homes, a scenario that is starting to be replicated in Europe and North America. In late January, the Chinese government took the first measures to shut down transportation links. Authorities later put entire cities under quarantine in Hubei province, where the coronavirus originated, and elsewhere in the country.

The isolation hit retail sales, which collapsed 20.5% in the first two months of the year. Analysts polled by Bloomberg had expected only a 4% drop.

Today In: Manufacturing

Similarly, fixed-asset investment, which measures expenditures on things like infrastructure and property, plummeted 24.5% - the indicator’s first contraction on record. Analysts had expected only a 2% decrease. 

“The coronavirus is the simple explanation to these unprecedented drops in core economic indicators,” says Rory Green, an economist focused on China at the London-based consultancy TS Lombard. Green posits that the predictions missed the mark for three reasons: first, because China had started in January to show signs of building economic momentum; secondly, because the nationwide lockdown partly coincided with the Lunar New Year holiday, when businesses would have been closed anyway; and thirdly, because there were doubts Beijing would allow such negative numbers to be published. 

“The bottom has definitely been reached,” Green says. “The question now is the speed and strength of the recovery.”

Factories have started to reopen gradually across China’s provinces. In many cases, the return to work has happened in stages. Sun Huimin, president of Jiangyin Donglian High-Pressure Pipe Fitting in eastern Jiangsu province, says local workers were the first to return to his factory, while many of the employees who had traveled to other provinces during the Lunar New Year had returned but were still in isolation in their homes. Sun says he expects production and orders to pick up by April or May.

People’s isolation will continue to affect both industrial production and consumption for the near future, says independent economic analyst Ye Tan. “The rate of work resumption is indeed beginning to rise, and we know that the amount of electricity and power generation has also started to rise, but it will take a while to fully resume production,” she says.

Ye says she expects the government to stimulate consumption and boost investment “in new and old infrastructure … on a large scale.”

The flip side of a large government stimulus is that it’s going to weaken China down the road, Green says, making the economy less efficient and less sustainable.

Meanwhile, analysts say March will be a decisive month in terms of whether an economic recovery can be expected in the first quarter.



The coronavirus’ impact on China’s economy was made plain in new numbers released on Monday, which showed a collapse across the board.

Strict containment efforts, including the full-scale lockdown of Wuhan, where the new coronavirus was first reported, has led analysts to downgrade their outlook for the Chinese economy, with most now expecting a historic contraction in the first quarter.

On Monday, newly released economic data points fell dramatically further than analysts had predicted.
For example, retail sales,  a key metric of consumption in the world’s second-largest economy, fell by 20.5%, the first decline on record. 

The median forecast of a group of analysts, conducted by Bloomberg, had predicted a 4.0% contraction. 

Industrial production – a measure of manufacturing, mining and utilities activity – declined by 13.5% over the first two months of the year, combined data for January and February showed.

The numbers were well below expectations of a 3.0% decline. It was also the first decline on record, although ordinarily the data is released monthly.

Fixed asset investment – a gauge of expenditure on items including infrastructure, property, machinery and equipment – collapsed by 24.5%, much worse than analysts’ predictions of minus 2.0%. This was the first shrinkage on record.
While China is slowly getting back up to speed, other major economies are just starting to feel the bite of the coronavirus outbreak. 

Overnight the United States ramped up its response to the pandemic, with the US Federal Reserve cutting interest rates to near zero, as well as announcing that it would embark on a new round of quantitative easing.

Global markets shrugged off the cut, suggesting that more creative policy measures may be required to arrest the prospect of a recession.

The forthcoming lockdown in large parts of the world will also hamper China’s recovery effort. A supply-side hit to the global economy is predicted from China’s shutdown, but with the West now dealing with severe outbreaks of their own, demand is set to provide an economic shock too.
Some firms in China are concerned already that multinational companies may reduce their reliance on Chinese-made products, accelerating a shift to alternative manufacturing bases and damaging the extensive supply chain that has been constructed in the mainland over recent decades.

Monday’s data showed that manufacturing output alone had slumped by 15.7% over January and February, while investment in the sector fell by a massive 31.5%.

A spokesman for the National Bureau of Statistics, Mao Shengyong, said that while the virus was responsible for the historic slump, “the impact of the virus is short-term and manageable.”

“Only this time next month, will we know what first quarter gross domestic product looks like,” Mao said. “It will mainly depend on March’s performance, since this month accounts for about 40% of the quarterly economy in the first quarter, and January and February combined account for 60%.”

China’s central bank on Sunday said it would use “a variety of measures” to bring down the cost of borrowing for companies that have been hit hard by the coronavirus outbreak.

Analysts, meanwhile, have called for a coordinated effort among policymakers around the world to deal with the fallout of the pandemic, which should include fiscal stimulus.
How serious is the COVID-19 outbreak? It turned China honest. The National Bureau of Statistics (NBS) described January-February economic activity as nothing less than a depression. A short depression to be sure — March and April will be better. And they will be presented by the NBS as better than they actually are. But China did the world a service by being realistic today.

The NBS was more willing to be candid than economists Reuters polled less than two weeks ago. As a group, they predicted GDP would grow 3.5 percent in the first quarter. Just slightly off. Industrial output fell 13.5 percent through February. The services index fell 13 percent. So much for the good news.
Exports dropped 16 percent, retail sales 20.5 percent, fixed asset investment 24.5 percent. Most shocking, the NBS admitted one measure of unemployment topped six percent. In a post here at the end of February, I guessed GDP would contract 2.4 percent. That was too cautious. March will be stronger, but not nearly enough to achieve only a 2.4-percent contraction.

Yet the policy response has been muted. When the global financial crisis hit, bank lending jumped more than 30 percent. In January-February, it rose 12 percent. One reason for this is a much larger loan base — China is heavily leveraged and can’t react as thoughtlessly as in 2009. Another is simply that it’s hard to seek or offer new credit with people confined to their homes.

But Beijing also knows this will pass, soon. There has been debate over whether a very sharp, V-shaped recovery is wishful thinking. With many producers and consumers entirely shut down in February, even partial reopening is V-shaped. It won’t be business as usual in a month, but April will continue the upward trend from the second half of March.

Over the course of the second quarter, international partners will become the main economic problem. As with China, it would have been helpful if the US and others were not setting extremely low policy interest rates and/or running huge fiscal deficits before COVID-19 hit, since the impact of doing so is now smaller.

Still, any stimulus is limited in this situation. GDP measures economic activity and COVID-caused restrictions are designed to curb or halt activity. If such restrictions spread across the globe to protect public health, everyone else’s GDP will plunge as well. This will feed back to slow China after its spring burst.

Thankfully, GDP remains overrated as a measure of prosperity. The Communist Party was stunningly honest about the awful numbers because the blow to prosperity was only short-term. January and February ensure true GDP growth will be negative the first half of the year but, by June, the economy will be far better than now for ordinary people.

Warning: editorializing ahead. The productivity of American workers will return by this summer. The depth of our financial system is unchanged. Our land provides abundant food and energy. China’s economy will rally soon, and then our economy will rally more strongly than that.
